

\noindent{\small UDC 517.956.47  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 74G55

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf About one approach to solving the inverse problem for parabolic equation$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it  A.~P.~Zhabko$\,^1$%
, K.~B.~Nurtazina$\,^2$%
, V.~V.~Provotorov$\,^3$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%

}

\efootnote{
%%
\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ This work was supported from the Ministry of
education and science of the Republic Kazakhstan (projekt N
АR05136197).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University,
7--9, Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
L. N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, 2, ul. Satpaeva,
Nur-Sultan,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
010008,~Republic Kazakhstan



\noindent%
$^3$~%
Voronezh~State~University,~1,~Universitetskaya~pl.,~Voronezh,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
394006, Russian Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:}
Zhabko~A.~P.,~Nurtazina~K.~B.,~Provotorov~V.~V. About one approach
to solving the inverse problem for parabolic equation. {\it
Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied Mathematics.
Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear, vol.~15,
iss.~\issuenum, pp.~\pageref{p3}--\pageref{p3e}.\\
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent Consider the problem of determining the
coefficients in the differential equation of parabolic types and
boundary conditions on the known sections of the solutions of the
initial-boundary value problem. Used spectral approach based on
spectral properties of the elliptic operator of the
initial-boundary value problem and the methods of solving the
inverse spectral problem of restoring the Sturm---Liouville
operator on two sequences of the eigenvalues, that corresponding
to two sets of boundary conditions. In the work presented
sufficient conditions of determination of two sequences of the
eigenvalues by two sets of boundary conditions and terms of the
uniqueness of the solution of the inverse problem The paper
considers the case where the initial-boundary value problem
contains the specifics --- the interval of change contains
variable include a finite number of the points, where the
differential equation is meaningless and
replaced conditions agreement.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: parabolic system, inverse problem, the
eigenvalues of boundary value problems, the poles of the
analytical continuation of the Green's function.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


\textbf{Introduction.} Many questions of mathematical physics lead
to the need to determine the coefficients in a partial
differential equation and the coefficients in the boundary
conditions with known functionals from the solution of the
corresponding initial-boundary value problem. In the case when the
coefficients in a differential equation depend on the spatial
variable, an explicit representation of the solution (for example,
as an expansion in the eigenfunctions of the elliptic operator of
the problem) makes it impossible to determine these coefficients.
Therefore, other approaches are used, in particular, spectral,
based on the spectral properties of the elliptic operator of the
initial-boundary value problem and methods for solving the inverse
spectral problem of recovering the Sturm---Liouville operator from
two sequences of eigenvalues corresponding to two sets of boundary
conditions (B.~M.~Levitan, M.~G.~Gasymov, I.~S.~Sargsyan,
V.~A.~Yurko [1--7] and bibliography there). The sufficient
conditions for determining of two sequences of eigenvalues from
two sets of boundary conditions and the condition for the
uniqueness of the solution of the inverse problem are presented
below. Solving the inverse problem, we consider two cases~---
first, we will consider in detail the case of using the classical
recovery problem of the Sturm---Liouville operator, then we will
specify the way to solve the inverse problem with features
determined by the presence of points in the spatial variable
change interval, where the differential equation is replaced by
the matching conditions ([8,~p.~33; 9,~p.~31]).

\textbf{Setting of a problem, the basic statement.} Consider a
uniform rod of length $\ell$, insulated from the sides and thin
enough so that at any time the temperature at all points of the
cross section can be considered the same. Denote by $T(x,t)$,
$x,t\in [0,\ell]\times[0,\infty)$, the function that determines
the quantitative characteristic of the process of heat propagation
in the rod, and by $a(x)$, $b(x)$, $x\in [0,\ell]$ the functions
characterizing the internal properties of thermal phenomena
(thermal conductivity, velocity characteristics, thermal
resistance of the medium). Let the functions $T(x,t)$,  $a(x)$,
$b(x)$ satisfy the differential equation
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} a(x)\frac{\partial T(x,t)}{\partial
t}=\frac{\partial }{\partial x }\left(b(x)\frac{\partial
T(x,t)}{\partial x}\right), \ ~ x\in(0,\ell),\,\,\,t>0,
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
that determines the law of heat transfer in the rod.

We divide the segment $[0,\ell]$ by dots $\xi_j$
($j=0,1,...,N,N+1$): $0=\xi_0< \xi_1<...<\xi_N<\xi_{N+1}=\ell$ and
we denote: $(0,\ell)_\xi=\mathop{\bigcup}\limits_{j=0}^N
(\xi_j,\xi_{j+1})$ ($[0,\ell]$ is the closure $(0,\ell)_\xi$),
$\Omega_\infty=(0,\ell)_\xi\times(0,\infty)$,
$\overline{\Omega}_\infty=[0,\ell]\times[0,\infty]$. Let functions
$T(x,t)$, $x,t\in [0,\ell]\times[0,\infty)$, $a(x)$, $b(x)$, $x\in
[0,\ell]$ be connected by a differential equation
\begin{equation}\label{eq2}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 a(x)\frac{\partial T(x,t)}{\partial t}=\frac{\partial }{\partial x }\left(b(x)\frac{\partial T(x,t)}{\partial x}\right), \ ~
 x\in\Omega_\infty ,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
and the agreement conditions in points $\xi_j$:
\begin{equation}\label{eq3}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} T(\xi^-_j,t)=T(\xi^+_j,t),\,\,\,
b(\xi^+_j)\frac{\partial T(\xi^+_j,t)}{\partial x}
-b(\xi^-_j)\frac{\partial T(\xi^-_j,t)}{\partial x}=m_jT(\xi_j,t)\\[0.2cm]
(j=1,2,...,N),
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
here

\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
T(\xi^+,t)=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\epsilon\rightarrow0}T(\xi+\epsilon,t)$,\ ~ $\frac{\partial T(\xi^+,t)}{\partial x}=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\epsilon\rightarrow0}\frac{\partial T(\xi+\epsilon,t)}{\partial
x},\\[0.3cm]
T(\xi^-,t)=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\epsilon\rightarrow0}T(\xi-\epsilon,t)$,\
~ $\frac{\partial T(\xi^-,t)}{\partial
x}=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{\epsilon\rightarrow0}\frac{\partial
T(\xi-\epsilon,t)}{\partial x}.
\end{array} }}
\]
Relations (2), (3) are called the differential equation on
$(0,\ell)$ with singularities at the points $\xi_j$ ($j=1,...,N$).
In applied heat transfer problems, equation (2), (3) describes the
process of heat distribution with external control devices (such
can perform the functions of control actions on the process), the
peripheral components of which are located at the points $\xi_j$,
$j=0,1,...,N,M+1$ (see, for example, [10,~p.~10]). Physical
phenomena in extreme situations with phase transition temperatures
and diffusion processes in materials of complex structures such as
polymers are studied using integro-differential equations with
memory. The inverse problem for such a process is solved, for
example, in  [11], where the boundary control method [12, 13] is
applied. It is based on deep connections between controllability
and identifiability of dynamical systems.

The  agreement conditions (2) describe the distribution of heat in
the neighbourhood of the points that the peripheral components of
control devices put on and represent generalized Kirchhoff
relations --- a jump in heat fluxes with proportionality
coefficients in adjacent parts of a heat-conducting material
(rod).

To set the initial-boundary value problems  we introduce the
initial\pagebreak

\begin{equation}\label{eq4}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 T(x,0)=0, \ ~~ x\in[0,\ell],
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
and boundary conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq5}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \frac{\partial T(0^+,t)}{\partial
x}=\alpha\left(T(0^+,t)-T_0(t)\right),\,\,\, \frac{\partial
T(\ell^-,t)}{\partial
x}=-\beta\left(T(\ell^-,t)-T_\ell(t)\right),\,\,\, t>0.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
To simplify the presentation, the initial condition (4) is assumed
to be homogeneous. The boundary conditions (5) are determined by
the functions $T_0(t)$, $T_\ell(t)$, $t>0$, and constant $\alpha$,
$\beta$. In this case, the simplest case --- the linear one --- of
the absence of the convective effect of the thermal process is
studied.

Further we assume that $T(x,t)$ from the class
$C^{1,0}(\overline{\Omega}_\infty)\cap C^{2,1}(\Omega_\infty)$,
$a(x)$, $b(x)$ positive on $[0,\ell]$ and $a(x)\in\mathop{\cup
}\limits_{j=0}^N C[\xi_j,\xi_{j+1}]$, $b(x)\in\mathop{\cup
}\limits_{j=0}^N C^1[\xi_j,\xi_{j+1}]$; functions $T_0(t)$,
$T_\ell(t)$ continuous on $[0,\infty)$, such that there exist
constants $C_1>0$, $C_2$ for them, and there are relations
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} |T_0(t)|\leq C_1e^{C_2t}, \ ~
|T_\ell(t)|\leq C_1e^{C_2t}.
\end{array} }}
\]

The initial-boundary value problem formed by the differential
system (1), (4), (5) has a unique solution [9, p. 75], the unique
solvability of system (2)--(5) was established in [8,~p.~33; 10,
p. 10], where a problem with singularities is interpreted as a
problem with distributed parameters on a geometric graph.

Solution $T(x,t)$ of problem (1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5) with given
functions $a(x)$, $b(x)$, $T_0(t)$, $T_\ell(t)$ and constant
$\alpha$, $\beta$ will be called the solution of the direct
problem (1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5). By the inverse problem (1),
(4), (5) or (2)--(5), we understand the problem of recovering
functions $a(x)$, $b(x)$ and constants $\alpha$, $\beta$ according
to information about solution $T(x,t)$.

Let, further, the parameter  $\alpha$ in the boundary conditions
(5) takes two different values $\alpha_1$ and $\alpha_2$. Let us
denote by $T_k(x,t)$ solving the initial-boundary value problem
(1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5) for $\alpha=\alpha_k$ for each fixed
$k=1,2$, and by $f_k(t)=T_k(x_{*},t)$, $t>0$, the solution cross
section $T_k(x,t)$, $k=1,2$, at the point $x=x_{*}$ (for system
(2)--(5) the point $x_{*}$ can coincide with one of $\xi_j$,
$j=\overline{1,N}$).

\textbf{Definition.} \emph{Let the functions $b(x)$, $T_0(t)$,
$T_\ell(t)$ and $f_k(t)\in C^1[0,\infty)$} ($k=1,2$) \emph{are
given. The set $\left\{T_k(x,t), \,a(x), \, \alpha_k, \,\beta
\,(k=1,2)\right\}$ is called the solution of the inverse problem}
(1), (4), (5) \emph{or} (2)--(5)\emph{,~if}:

1) $T_k(x,t)\in C(\overline{\Omega}_\infty)\cap
C^{2,1}(\Omega_\infty)$, $T_k(x_{*},t)=f_k(t)$;

2) $\alpha$, $\beta$  \emph{are constants, } $\alpha^2+\beta^2>0$;

3) \emph{for each fixed $k=1,2$ function $T_k(x,t)$, $a(x)$,
$b(x)$, $T_0(t)$, $T_\ell(t)$  and constants $\alpha_k$, $\beta$,
satisfy the problem} (1), (4), (5) \emph{or} (2)--(5).

As it follows from the definition, to solve the inverse problem
(1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5) means: for given $b(x)$, $T_0(t)$,
$T_\ell(t)$ and two sets of functions $f_k(t)=T_k(x_{*},t)$
($k=1,2$), that meet the corresponding boundary conditions (5) and
$x=0$ with $\alpha=\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$), recover functions
$T_k(x,t)$, $a(x)$ and constants $\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$),  $\beta$.
The inverse problem (1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5) in the case when the
function $a(x)$ is known, but $b(x)$  to be determined, is put in
a similar way.

We prove the uniqueness of the solution of the inverse problem
(1), (4), (5) or (2)--(5), based on the results of [1, 4, 5, 7] on
the recovering of the Sturm---Liouville operator from two spectrum
corresponding to two different boundary conditions at a point
$x=0$.

We give equations (1) and (2) using the substitution

\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
z(x)= \frac{1}{L}\int\limits_0^x\left(\frac{a(\tau)}{b(\tau)}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}d\tau,\quad L=\frac{1}{\pi}\int\limits_0^\ell\left(\frac{a(\tau)}{b(\tau)}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}d\tau,\\
U(z,t)=\left(a(x)b(x)\right)^{\frac{1}{4}}T(x,t)
\end{array} }}
\]
(replacement $\{x, T(x,t)\}\Rightarrow\{z, U(z,t)\}$) to mind
\begin{equation}\label{eq6}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} L^2\frac{\partial U(z,t)}{\partial
t}-\frac{\partial^2 U(z,t)}{\partial z^2}\right)-
q(z)U(z,t),\,\,\,x\in(0,\ell),\,\,\,t>0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
and
\begin{equation}\label{eq7}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} L^2\frac{\partial U(z,t)}{\partial
t}-\frac{\partial^2 U(z,t)}{\partial z^2}\right)-
q(z)U(z,t),\,\,\,z\in(\zeta_j,\zeta_{j+1})\,\,\,(j=0,1,...,N),\,\,\,t>0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
respectively, where $q(z)=\frac{\theta''(z)}{\theta(z)}$,
$\theta(z)= \left(a(x)b(x)\right)^{\frac{1}{4}}$,
$\zeta_j=z(\xi_j)$ ($j=\overline{1,N}$), $\zeta_0=0$,
$z(\xi_{N+1})=\pi$. The agreement conditions  (3) take the form
\begin{equation}\label{eq8}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} U(\zeta^-_j,t)=U(\zeta^+_j,t),\,\,\,
\frac{\partial U(\zeta^+_j,t)}{\partial x}
-\frac{\partial U(\zeta^-_j,t)}{\partial x}=m_jU(\zeta_j,t)\\[0.2cm]
(j=1,2,...,N),
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
the initial condition (4) does not change its form:
\begin{equation}\label{eq9}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 U(z,0)=0,\quad z\in[0,\pi],
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
and the boundary conditions (5) are converted to
\begin{equation}\label{eq10}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \frac{\partial U(0^+,t)}{\partial
z}-hU(0^+,t)=-\frac{\alpha L}{\theta(0)}T_0(t),\quad
\frac{\partial U(\pi^-,t)}{\partial x}+HU(\pi^-,t)=\frac{\beta
L}{\theta(\pi)}T_\ell(t),
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where $h=(\alpha L+\theta(0)\theta'(0))/\theta^2(0)$, $H=(\beta
L+\theta(\pi)\theta'(\pi))/\theta^2(\pi)$. In this case, the
interval  $[0,\ell]$ is converted to  $[0,\pi]$.

\textbf{I.} Let us dwell on the analysis of the inverse problem
(1), (4), (5), reduced to the form (6), (9), (10). The initial
boundary value problem (6), (9), (10) generates a spectral problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq11}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -y''+q(z)y=\mu y,\quad z\in(0,\pi),
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq12}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y'(0^+)-hy(0^+)=0,\quad
y'(\pi^-)+Hy(\pi^-)=0.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Let in the first relation (5) $\alpha=\alpha_k$, $k=1,2$, then in
(12) $h=h_k$ ($k=1,2$). Let us also denote the sets of eigenvalues
$\{\mu^1_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$  and  $\{\mu^2_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ of the
boundary value problems (11), (12) for $h=h_1$  and $h=h_2$   (the
Sturm---Liouville problem (11), (12) has only a discrete spectrum
[7]).

There is an inverse Sturm---Liouville problem [1, 4, 7] based on
the following fact: the spectral function $\rho(\mu)$ of the
operator generated by the boundary value problem (11), (12)
uniquely determines this problem (i.~e. $q(z)$, $h_1$, $h_2$,
$H$), and in the case of a regular Sturm---Liouville problem, the
spectral function is determined by two sequences of numbers
$\{\mu^1_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ and $\{\mu^2_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$:
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\rho(\mu)=\sum\limits_{\mu^1_n<\mu}\frac{1}{\omega_n},\quad
\omega_n=\frac{h_2-h_1}{\mu^2_n-\mu^1_n}\mathop{\Pi}\limits_{i=0
(i\neq n)}\frac{\mu^1_i-\mu^1_n}{\mu^2_i-\mu^1_i},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
here $\omega_n$ ($n=0,1,...$) are the norms of the eigenfunctions
$y(z,\mu^1_n)$ (normalization factors) corresponding to the
eigenvalues $\mu^1_n$. Numerical sequences
$\{\mu^1_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ (or  $\{\mu^2_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$) and
$\{\omega_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ are called the spectral
characteristics of the Sturm---Liouville operator of the boundary
value problem (11), (12).

We can specify the necessary and sufficient conditions for the two
sequences of real numbers $\{\mu^1_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$  and
$\{\mu^2_n\}_{n=0}^\infty$ to be two spectrums of the boundary
value problem (11), (12) ($h=h_k$, $k=1,2$), corresponding to the
same equation (11) with a continuous potential  $q(z)$, i.~e.
solve Sturm---Liouville problem (11), (12). These conditions are
as follows [1, 4]:

1) numbers  $\mu^1_n$ and $\mu^2_n$ ($n=0,1,...$) are alternated,

2) asymptotic formulas are valid for them
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \sqrt{\mu^k_n}= n+\frac{a_0^k}{n}+
O(\frac{1}{n}), \ ~ k=1,2,
\end{array} }}
\]
%
where $a_0^1\neq a_0^2$.

\textbf{The main result.} The solution of the inverse problem (1),
(4), (5) will consist of three stages:

1) determination of eigenvalues $\mu^1_n$, $\mu^2_n$ ($n=0,1,...$)
of problem (11), (12) ($h=h_k$, $k=1,2$),

2) definition of potential $q(z)$  in equation (11) and constants
$h_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H$ in boundary conditions (12),

3) the definition of the combination $\left\{T_k(x,t), \,a(x),
\,\alpha_k, \,\beta \,(k=1,2)\right\}$.

\textbf{Remark 1.} In the case when the function   $a(x)$   is
known, but  $b(x)$ to be determined, the set is determined
$\left\{T_k(x,t), \,b(x), \,\alpha_k, \,\beta \,(k=1,2)\right\}$.

In the future, along with problem (1), (4), (5), we consider its
Laplace transform (for the possibility of applying the Laplace
transform in this case, see [14, p. 234]).

The Fourier method for problem (1), (4), (5) allows us to
construct a solution when the boundary conditions (5) are
inhomogeneous. Under some conditions that are not burdensome in
applications, relatively  $\alpha$ and $\beta$
($\beta-\alpha-\alpha\beta\ell\neq0$) the solution $T(x,t)$  can
be represented as [9, p. 473]
\begin{equation}\label{eq14}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
T(x,t)=(c_1x+c_2) T_0(t)+(c_3x+c_4) T_\ell(t)~+\\
+
\sum\limits_{n=0}^\infty\left(W_n(t)e^{-\gamma_nt}+\int\limits_0^tV_n(\tau)e^{-\gamma_n(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)u_n(x),
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where  $c_1, c_2, c_3, c_4$ are fixed constants, $\gamma_n$,
$u_n(x)$ ($n=0,1,...$) are eigenvalues and orthonormal
eigenfunctions of the boundary value problem
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -\frac{d}{d
x}\left(b(x)\frac{u}{dx}\right)=\gamma a(x)u, \ ~ x\in(0,\ell),
 \end{array} }}
\]
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} b(\xi^+_j)\frac{d u(0^+)}{\partial
x}-\alpha u(0^+)=0, \ ~  b(\xi^-_j)\frac{d u(\ell^-)}{\partial
x}+\beta u(\ell^-)=0,
\end{array} }}
\]
$W_n(t)$, $V_n(t)$ ($n=0,1,...$) are the Fourier coefficients of
functions
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
W(x,t)=(c_1x+c_2) T_0(t)+(c_3x+c_4) T_\ell(t),\\[0.2cm]
V(x,t)=-a(x)\frac{\partial W(x,t)}{\partial t}+\frac{\partial
}{\partial x }\left(b(x)\frac{\partial W(x,t)}{\partial x}\right),
\end{array} }}
\]
when decomposing them in a Fourier series in a system
$\left\{u_n(x)\right\}_{n=0}^\infty$.

The representation of the solution $T(x,t)$  in the form of a
series (14) confirms the validity of applying the Laplace
transform to problem (1), (4), (5) in the right half-plane
$\mathbb{P}_+=\left\{p: {\rm Re} \, p \geq \nu, ~
\nu>-\gamma_0\right\}$, if the constant $C_2$  in the description
of functions $T_0(t)$, $T_\ell(t)$ is smaller than  $\nu$. Below,
the image of the Laplace function $\phi$  will be indicated
$\phi^*$.

The initial-boundary value problem (1), (4), (5) transformed
according to Laplace in the half-plane  $\mathbb{P}_+$  takes the
form
\begin{equation}\label{eq15}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \frac{d }{d x }\left(b(x)\frac{d
T^*(x,p)}{dx}\right)=pa(x)T^*(x,p), \ ~ x\in(0,\ell),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq16}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \frac{\partial T^*(0^+,p)}{\partial
x}=\alpha\left(T^*(0^+,p)-T^*_0(p)\right),\,\,\, \frac{\partial
T^*(\ell^-,p)}{\partial
x}=-\beta\left(T^*(\ell^-,p)-T^*_\ell(p)\right)\!.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

We introduce the following notation:  $\mathbb{M}=\{\mu_m\}$ is
the set of eigenvalues $\mu_m$ of the Sturm---Liouville problem
(11), (12),  $\mathbf{\Lambda}=\{L^2\lambda_m\}$ is the set of
poles $\lambda_m$ of the analytic continuation of an element
$\frac{f^*(-p)}{T^*_0(-p)}$, $f^*(p)=T^*(x_{*},p)$,
$x_{*}\in(0,\ell)$, along the real half-line $\left\{p: {\rm Re}
\, p \geq -\nu, {\rm Im} \,\nu=0\right\}$, $T(x,t)$  is the
solution of initial-boundary value problem (1), (4),~(5).

\textbf{Theorem 1.} \emph{If  $\alpha\neq0$ and
$T_\ell(t)\equiv0$ then the inclusion  $\mathbf{\Lambda}\subseteq
\mathbb{M}$ is correct.}

P~r~o~o~f. The boundary value problem (15), (16) in the half-plane
$\mathbb{P}_+$  has no eigenvalues and, therefore, is uniquely
solvable for  $p\in\mathbb{P}_+$. Let us denote by $G(x,s,p)$  the
Green function of the problem (15), (16). Then
\begin{equation}\label{eq17}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} T^*(x,p)=\alpha G(x,0,p)T^*_0(p)+\beta
G(x,\ell,p)T^*_\ell(p).
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
The Green function is a meromorphic function of a parameter  $p$
on the entire complex plane, its poles (all poles of the Green
function are simple) can only be the eigenvalues $\eta_n$
($n=0,1,...$)  of problem (15), (16) (for $T^*_0(p)\equiv
T^*_\ell(p)\equiv0$).

We denote  $\lambda_n=-\eta_n$  the poles of the function
$G(x,s,-p)$. Obviously $\lambda_n$  belong to the real semi-axis
$\left\{ {\rm Re} \, p \geq -\nu,  {\rm Im} \, p=0\right\}$. Given
the replacement $\{x, T(x,t)\}\Rightarrow\{z, U(z,t)\}$ (i.~e.
$z(x)=
\frac{1}{L}\int\limits_0^x\left(\frac{a(\tau)}{b(\tau)}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}d\tau$,
$L=\frac{1}{\pi}\int\limits_0^\ell\left(\frac{a(\tau)}{b(\tau)}\right)^{\frac{1}{2}}d\tau$),
we obtain
\begin{equation}\label{eq18}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \mu_n=L^2\lambda_n.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
Since  $T_\ell(t)\equiv0$, the statement of the theorem obviously
follows from (17) and the relation
$G(x_{*},0,p)=\frac{T^*(x_{*},p)}{\alpha
T^*_0(p)}=\frac{f^*(p)}{\alpha T^*_0(p)}$.

\textbf{Remark 2.} If  $\alpha=0$, then  $T_\ell(t)\neq0$, and the
eigenvalues  $\mu_n$  are determined from (18), where  $\lambda_n$
are the poles of the analytic continuation
$\frac{f^*(-p)}{T^*_\ell(-p)}$.

\textbf{Remark 3.} If in the first relation (4) we replace
$\alpha$  with  $\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$), then the eigenvalues
$\mu^k_n$ ($k=1,2$) of problem (9)--(11) with $h=h_k$ ($k=1,2$)
are associated by means of (18) with the poles $\lambda^k_n$   of
the analytic continuation of an element $f^*_k(-p)/T^*_0(-p)$
($k=1,2$) or of an element $f^*_k(-p)/T^*_\ell(-p)$ ($k=1,2$), if
any of $\alpha_k$  equals zero.

\textbf{Remark 4.} If you only need to define a function  $a(x)$
or  $b(x)$, then the assumption $T_\ell(t)\equiv0$   can always be
considered complete.

We indicate a method of analytic continuation of elements defined
in the half-plane   by the ratio of Laplace integrals. Moreover,
some ideas were borrowed from [15].

Suppose now that  $T_\ell(t)\neq0$, then and  $T_0(t)\neq0$. Let
be $g_1(p)= \frac{\beta T^*_\ell(p)}{\alpha T^*_0(p)}$,~ $g_2(p)=
\frac{f^*(p)}{\alpha T^*_0(p)}$,~ $G_0(p)=G(x_{*},0,p)$,~
$G_\ell(p)=G(x_{*},\ell,p)$. In these notation, the relation (17)
when $x=\xi_1$  takes the form
\begin{equation}\label{eq19}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} g_2(p)= G_0(p)+g_1(p)G_\ell(p).
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

We represent the function $g_2(p)$   as a power series in a
neighborhood of an arbitrary real point $p_1\in \mathbb{P}_+$:
\begin{equation}\label{eq20}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} g_2(p)= \sum\limits_{j=0}^\infty
g_2^{0,j}(p-p_1)^j,\quad g_2^{0,j}=\frac{1}{j!}g_2^{(j)}(p_1).
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
According to the Fabry relation theorem, if on the boundary of the
circle of convergence of series (20) there is one singular point,
namely, a simple pole  $\overline{p}$, then
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \overline{p}= p_1
+\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{0,j}}{g_2^{0,j+1}}.
\end{array} }}
\]
Since in the half-plane $\mathbb{P}_+$   to the right of the point
$\nu$, the Green function $G(x,s,p)$  has no singular points, then
$\overline{p}= -\lambda_0$ its first pole, and therefore
$-\lambda_0=p_1
+\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{0,j}}{g_2^{0,j+1}}$.
Singling out the main member in (20), we get a series
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\left(1+\frac{p-p_1}{\lambda_0+p_1}\right)\sum\limits_{j=0}^\infty
g_2^{0,j}(p-p_1)^j= g_2^{0,0}-\sum\limits_{j=0}^\infty
g_2^{1,j}(p-p_1)^j,\quad
g_2^{1,j+1}=\frac{-g_2^{0,j}}{\lambda_0+p_1}-g_2^{0,j+1}
\end{array} }}
\]
with the same center at a point $p_1$  as (20), but with a radius
of convergence equal to the distance from the point  $p_1$ to the
second pole $-\lambda_1$  of the Green function  $G(x,s,p)$. From
here we find  $-\lambda_1$:
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -\lambda_1=p_1
+\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{1,j}}{g_2^{1,j+1}},\quad
g_2^{1,j+1}=-\frac{g_2^{0,j}}{\lambda_0+p_1}-g_2^{0,j+1}
\end{array} }}
\]
and so on. Thus we obtained (when $g_1(p)=0$, see (19)).

\textbf{Theorem 2.} \emph{Let the conditions of Theorem} 1
\emph{were fulfilled, then the eigenvalues $\mu_n$ ($n=0,1,...,$)
of the boundary value problem }(11), (12) \emph{are determined
from the relations}:
\begin{equation}\label{eq21}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
-\lambda_0=p_1 +\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{0,j}}{g_2^{0,j+1}},\quad g_2^{0,j}=\frac{1}{j!}\,g_2^{(j)}(p_1),\\
-\lambda_n=p_1 +\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{n,j}}{g_2^{n,j+1}},\quad g_2^{n,j+1}=-\frac{g_2^{n-1,j}}{\lambda_{n-1}+p_1}-g_2^{n-1,j+1},\quad n=1,2,...,\\
\mu_n=L^2\lambda_n,\quad n=0,1,...,
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\emph{where  $p_1\in \mathbb{P}_+$ is an arbitrary real number.}

\textbf{Remark 5.} If exists
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{f^{*\,(j+1)}(p)}{(j+1)f^{*\,(j)}(p)}=q
\end{array} }}
\]
for arbitrary real $p\in \mathbb{P}_+$  and series
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\Phi(p)=\sum\limits_{m=0}^\infty\frac{(-1)^m}{m\,!}T_0^{*\,(m)}(p)(p+\lambda_1)^m
\end{array} }}
\]
(representation of the function $T_0^{*}(p)$   as a power series)
converges, and $\Phi(p)\neq0$,  then $p+\lambda_1=- \frac{1}{q}$.

Indeed, from the statements of Theorem 2 it follows that
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -\frac{1}{\lambda_0+p}=
\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{*\,(j+1)}(p)}{(j+1)g_2^{*\,(j)}(p)}.
\end{array} }}
\]

We denote this limit by  $q_1$ and show that  $q=q_1$. Use
equality
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \frac{1}{\alpha_k}f_k^{*\,(j)}(p)= \\
=T_0^{*}(p)g_2^{(j)}(p)+...+\frac{j(j-1)...(j-m+1)}{m\,!}T_0^{*\,(m)}(p)g_2^{(j-m)}(p)+...+T_0^{*\,(j)}(p)g_2(p),
\end{array} }}
\]
from which it follows:
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{\alpha_k}\frac{f_k^{*\,(j)}(p)}{g_2^{(j)}(p)}= \\
=T_0^{*}(p)+...+\frac{j(j-1)...(j-m+1)}{m\,!}T_0^{*\,(m)}(p)\frac{g_2^{(j-m)}(p)}{g_2^{(j)}(p)}+...+T_0^{*\,(j)}(p)\frac{g_2(p)}{g_2^{(j)}(p)}.
\end{array} }}
\]

Passing to the limit at the left and right when
$j\rightarrow\infty$, we find
$\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{f_k^{*\,(j)}(p)}{g_2^{(j)}(p)}=\Phi(p)$.
So as $\Phi(p)\neq0$  and $\Phi(p)\neq\infty$  then
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
q_1=\mathop{\lim}\limits_{j\rightarrow\infty}\frac{g_2^{(j+1)}(p)}{f_k^{*\,(j+1)}(p)}\cdot
\frac{f_k^{*\,(j+1)}(p)}{(j+1)f_k^{*\,(j)}(p)}\cdot
\frac{f_k^{*\,(j)}(p)}{g_2^{(j)}(p)}=q,
\end{array} }}
\]
that required to prove.


We note the obvious benefit of the above statement: it allows us
to find the first pole on the basis more simply than (21), the
calculated limit in Remark 5.

The statements of Theorems 1 and 2 for finding the eigenvalues
$\mu_n$, $n=0,1,...$, of the boundary value problem (11), (12)
make it possible to determine the poles of the Green function
$G(x,s,p)$  with fixed first two arguments. In this connection, it
may happen that the set of eigenvalues $\mathbf{\Lambda}$  does
not coincide with the set of these poles $\mathbb{M}$  (therefore,
in Theorem 1, only the inclusion  $\mathbf{\Lambda}\subseteq
\mathbb{M}$ takes place). However, in applications for some cases,
from a priori considerations it is possible to obtain information
about the choice of a variable fixation point $x$  (everywhere
above is a point  $x=x_{*}$  or any $\xi_j$, $j=\overline{1,N}$)
so that at least the first few eigenvalues $\mu_n$  will determine
(see (18)) the first poles  $\lambda_n$. Therefore, we can assume
that the choice of the point of fixation of the variable $x$ is
such that the sets $\mathbf{\Lambda}$  and $\mathbb{M}$
coincide.

\textbf{Theorem 3.} \emph{Two sequences of numbers
$\left\{\mu^k_n\right\}_{n=0}^\infty$, $k=1,2$,  uniquely
determine the norms  $\omega_n=\int\limits_0^\pi y^2(z,\mu^1_n)dz$
of the eigenfunctions  $y(z,\mu^1_n)$ of the boundary value
problem} (11), (12) (\emph{normalization numbers, see the second
ratio} (13)):
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\omega_n=\pi\frac{a_0^2-a_0^1}{\mu^2_n-\mu^1_n}\mathop{\Pi}\limits_{i=0
(i\neq n)}\frac{\mu^1_i-\mu^1_n}{\mu^2_i-\mu^1_i},
\end{array} }}
\]
\emph{absolutely continuous on  $[0,\pi]$ function  $q(z)$ and
constant $h_1$, $h_2$, $H$. In addition
$h_2-h_1=\pi(a_0^2-a_0^1)$.}

A detailed proof of the theorem is given in [1].

Denote by $y(z,\mu)$  solution of the equation (11) with initial
conditions $y(0,\mu)=1$, $y'(0,\mu)=h_1$. Then the solution to
this problem is represented as
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(z,\mu)=\cos\sqrt{\mu}z+\int\limits_0^z
K(z,s)\cos\sqrt{\mu}\tau d\tau.
\end{array} }}
\]
Such a relation connecting the solution $y(z,\mu)$  of equation
(11) and the solution $\cos\sqrt{\mu}z$   of the equation
$-y''=\mu y$   with the initial conditions $y(0,\mu)=1$,
$y'(0,\mu)=0$, is called the transformation operator with the
kernel $K(z,s)$. Knowledge of the kernel $K(z,s)$  determines the
function  $y(z,\mu)$, and the function  $q(z)$ is thereby
determined since  $\mu-q(z)=-y''(z,\mu)/y(z,\mu)$, as well as
constants  $h$ and $H$ from the boundary conditions (12). Thus,
the inverse problem (11), (12) is reduced to the definition of a
function $K(z,s)$  that satisfies the integral equation
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} F(z,s)+K(z,s)=\int\limits_0^z F(\tau,s)
K(\tau,s) d\tau=0,\quad 0\leq s\leq z \leq \pi,
\end{array} }}
\]
where
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
F(z,s)=\frac{1}{\pi}+\sum\limits_{n=0}^\infty
\left(\frac{1}{\omega_n}\cos\sqrt{\mu_n}z\cos\sqrt{\mu_n}s -
\frac{2}{\pi}\cos nz\cos ns\right)\!,
\end{array} }}
\]
$\mu_n$ ($n=0,1,...$) are eigenvalues of the boundary value
problem (11), (12).

\textbf{Theorem 4.} \emph{The inverse problem} (1), (4), (5)
\emph{cannot have two different solutions.}

P~r~o~o~f. Suppose the opposite: there are two solutions to the
inverse problem (1), (4), (5), that is, two sets
$\left\{T^i_k(x,t), a^i(x), \alpha^i_k, \beta^i (k=1,2)\right\}$,
$i=1,2$. Hence, these solutions correspond to two functions
$q^i(z)$  and two sets of constants  $h^i_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H^i$,
$i=1,2$. For each fixed  $i=1,2$  function $q^i(z)$  and constant
$h^i_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H^i$, correspond to the sequence of
eigenvalues $\left\{\mu_n^{k,\,i}\right\}_{n=0}^\infty$ ($k=1,2$),
$i=1,2$.  On the other hand, the analytic continuation of the
elements $f^*_k(-p)/T^*_0(-p)$  ($f_k(t)=f^i_k(t)$, $k=1,2$,
$i=1,2$) uniquely determine the poles $\lambda^k_n$ ($k=1,2$), and
therefore, uniquely determine the eigenvalues $\mu^k_n$ ($k=1,2$).
This means that for $i=1,2$ $\mu_n^{k,\,i}=\mu^k_n$ ($k=1,2$). It
follows from Theorem~3 above that the sequences
$\left\{\mu^k_n\right\}_{n=0}^\infty$ ($k=1,2$) uniquely determine
the function $q(z)$   on the interval  $[0,\pi]$ and the numbers
$h_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H$. Therefore, for $i=1,2$ $q^i(z)\equiv q(z)$,
$h^i_k=h_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H^i=H$.

Do the replacement $\{x, T(x,t)\}\Rightarrow\{z, U(z,t)\}$  in the
opposite direction: $\{z, U(z,$ $t)\}\Rightarrow\{x, T(x,t)\}$,
then
\begin{equation}\label{eq22}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} a(x)b(x)=\theta^4(z(x)),\quad
x\in[0,\ell],
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where $\theta(z)$  is the solution of a boundary value problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq23}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \theta''(z)=q(z)\theta(z),\quad
z\in[0,\pi],
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq24}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \theta(0)=(a(0)b(0))^\frac{1}{4},\quad
\theta(\pi)=(a(\ell)b(\ell))^\frac{1}{4},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
but $z(x)$ is the solution of the Cauchy problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq25}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} z'(x)=\frac{1}{L}\frac{\theta^2(z)}{b(x)},
\ ~  x\in[0,\ell], \ ~  z(0)=0.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
From the assumptions made about the functions $a(x)$  and  $b(x)$
it follows that the boundary value problem (23), (24) is uniquely
solvable. The constants $\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$) and $\beta$  are
uniquely determined from the relations
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\alpha_k=\frac{1}{L}\left(h_k\theta^2(0)-\theta(0)\theta'(0)\right),\quad
\beta=\frac{1}{L}\left(H\theta^2(\pi)+\theta(\pi)\theta'(\pi)\right).
\end{array} }}
\]
By the found $a(x)$, $\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$) and $\beta$, the
function $T_k(x,t)$  for each fixed  $k=1,2$ is uniquely
determined by solving the direct problem (1), (4), (5). It is
clear that the resulting set $\left\{T_k(x,t), \,a(x), \,\alpha_k,
\,\beta \,(k=1,2)\right\}$  satisfies the definition of the
solution of the inverse problem (1), (4), (5) and for $i=1,2$,
$T^i_k(x,t)\equiv T_k(x,t)$, $a^i(x)\equiv a(x)$,
$\alpha^i_k=\alpha_k$ ($k=1,2$), $\beta^i=\beta$. The theorem is
proved.

\textbf{Remark 6.} The assertion of Theorem 4 remains true also in
the case when the function $b(x)$  is unknown, but the relation
connecting $a(x)$  and  $b(x)$  is known:  $a(x)=\Phi(b(x))$,
where  $\Phi(\cdot)>0$  is twice continuously differentiable by
its argument. If the system of equations (22), (25) has a unique
solution $b(x)>0$, $b(x)\in C^2[0,\ell]$  and  $z(x)\in
C^1[0,\ell]$ then the solution to the inverse problem (1), (4),
(5) is unique. The function $a(x)$  is determined from
$a(x)=\Phi(b(x))$.

The proof of Theorem 4 implies an algorithm for constructing a
solution, i.~e. set  $\left\{T_k(x,t), \,a(x), \, \alpha_k,
\,\beta \,(k=1,2)\right\}$, inverse problem (1), (4), (5). The
initial data for the inverse problem (1), (4), (5) are:

a) the functions entering the boundary conditions (5) $T_0(t)$ and
$T_\ell(t)$, $t>0$;

b) the sections $f_1(t)$, $f_2(t)$, $t>0$,  at the point $x=x_{*}$
of solutions of the initial-boundary value problem (1), (4), (5)
under two different ($\alpha=\alpha_k$, $k=1,2$,
$\alpha_1\neq\alpha_2$) boundary conditions (5) at a point  $x=0$;

c) function $b(x)$.

\textbf{Remark 7.} In the case when the function  $a(x)$ is known
(see clause (c)), the set   should be determined the set
$\left\{T_k(x,t), \,b(x), \, \alpha_k \,(k=1,2), \,\beta\right\}$.

The algorithm for constructing the solution of the inverse problem
(1), (4), (5):

1) there are poles $\lambda^k_n$, $n=0,1,...$ ($k=1,2$),  of
analytic continuation of elements $\frac{f^*_k(-p)}{T^*_0(-p)}$,
$f_k(t)=f_k(t)$ ($k=1,2$) --- statements of Theorems 1 and 2;

2) on two sequences of eigenvalues  $\mu^k_n$
($\mu^k_n=L^2\lambda^k_n$), $n=0,1,...$ ($k=1,2$), the function is
built
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
F(z,s)=\frac{1}{\pi}+\sum\limits_{n=0}^\infty
\left(\frac{1}{\omega_n}\cos\sqrt{\mu^1_n}z\cos\sqrt{\mu^1_n}s -
\frac{2}{\pi}\cos nz\cos ns\right)
\end{array} }}
\]
\!$\biggl($here
$\omega_n=\pi\frac{a_0^2-a_0^1}{\mu^2_n-\mu^1_n}\mathop{\Pi}\limits_{i=0
(i\neq n)}\frac{\mu^1_i-\mu^1_n}{\mu^2_i-\mu^1_i} \biggr)$ and the
solution  $K(z,s)$  of the integral equation is determined
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} F(z,s)+K(z,s)=\int\limits_0^z F(\tau,s)
K(\tau,s) d\tau=0,\quad 0\leq s\leq z \leq \pi;
\end{array} }}
\]

3) the potential $q(z)$  and constants   $h_k$ ($k=1,2$), $H$
are determined from the function  $K(z,s)$  found
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
q(z)=2\frac{d K(z,z)}{dz},\,\,\, h_1=K(0,0)=-F(0,0), \,\,\, h_2=K(0,0)+\pi(a_0^2-a_0^1),\\
\\
H=-\frac{y'(\pi,\mu^1_0)}{y(\pi,\mu^1_0)}=-\frac{y'(\pi,\mu^1_1)}{y(\pi,\mu^1_1)},...\,,-\frac{y'(\pi,\mu^1_n)}{y(\pi,\mu^1_n)},...\,,
\end{array} }}
\]
where $y(\pi,\mu^1_n)=\cos\sqrt{\mu^1_n}z+\int\limits_0^z
K(\tau,s)\sqrt{\mu^1_n}\tau d\tau$, $n=0,1,...$\,;

4) functions $T_k(x,t)$ ($k=1,2$) are defined as solutions of
direct problems (1), (4), (5) with those found $a(x)$, $\alpha_k$
($k=1,2$), $\beta$,  and, therefore, the set $\left\{T_k(x,t),
\,a(x), $\,$ \alpha_k, \,\beta \,(k=1,2)\right\}$  is determined.

\textbf{II.} Next, we consider the inverse problem with
singularities (2)--(5), reduced to the form (7)--(10). The
initial-boundary problem (7)--(10) corresponds to the spectral
problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq26}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -y''+q(z)y=\mu y,\quad
z\in(\zeta_j,\zeta_{j+1}),\,\,\,j=0,1,...,N,
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq27}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(\zeta^-_j,t)=y(\zeta^+_j,t),\quad
y'(\zeta^+_j,t)-y'(\zeta^-_j,t)=m_jy(\zeta_j,t),\,\,\,
j=1,2,...,N,
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\begin{equation}\label{eq28}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y'(0^+)-hy(0^+)=0,\quad
y'(\pi^-)+Hy(\pi^-)=0.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

In [8, p. 33] it is shown that the spectrum of the boundary value
problem (26)--(28) is discrete. If, as above, in the first
relation (5) we put $\alpha=\alpha_k$, $k=1,2$, then in (28)
$h=h_k$ ($k=1,2$)  and we get two sets of eigenvalues, knowledge
of which determines the spectral function of the operator
generated by the boundary value problem (26)--(28) (constant $h$
one of  $h_1$ or  $h_2$) and further potential $q(z)$  and
constant  $h_1$, $h_2$, $H$.

Assuming that the Laplace transform is applicable to problem
(2)--(5) (section \textbf{I}), statements similar to those
presented in Theorems 1 and 2 are applicable to determine the
eigenvalues of the boundary value problem (26)--(28). As a point
$x_{*}$ where the sections of solutions $f_k(t)=T_k(x_{*},t)$
($k=1,2$) of problem (2)--(5) are known, we can take any of the
points $\xi_j$, $j=\overline{1,N}$. Connection is established
(transformation operator with the kernel $K(z,s)$)
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(z,\mu)=y^0(z,\mu)+\int\limits_0^z
K(z,s)y^0(\tau,\mu) d\tau
\end{array} }}
\]
between the solution $y(z,\mu)$, $z\in (0,\pi)$ equations (26),
(27), satisfying the initial conditions $y(0,\mu)=1$,
$y'(0,\mu)=h$ and the solution
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y^0(z,\mu)=y^0_j(z,\mu), \,\,\,z\in
[\zeta_j,\zeta_{j+1}]  \ ~ (j=0,1,...,N)
\end{array} }}
\]
equations (26) (under $q(z)\equiv0$), (27) with initial conditions
$y(0,\mu)=1$, $y'(0,\mu)=0$; here
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y^0_0(z,\mu)=\cos\sqrt{\mu}z,\hfill
\\[0.2cm]
y^0_1(z,\mu)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{\mu}}\left(\sqrt{\mu}-m_1\cos\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_1\sin\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_1\right)\cos\sqrt{\mu}\zeta\,+\hfill
\\[0.2cm]
+\,\frac{1}{\sqrt{\mu}}m_1\cos^2\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_1\sin\sqrt{\mu}\zeta
\hfill
\\
\end{array} }}
\]
and under $j=2,3,...,N$
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y^0_j(z,\mu)=\left(\cos\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_j
y^0_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\mu}}y^{0,1}_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)\sin\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_j\right)\cos\sqrt{\mu}\zeta\,+\hfill
\\[0.2cm]
+\,\left(\sin\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_j
y^0_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)-\frac{1}{\sqrt{\mu}}y^{0,1}_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)\cos\sqrt{\mu}\zeta^+_j\right)\sin\sqrt{\mu}\zeta,\hfill
\\[0.2cm]
\end{array} }}
\]
where $y^{0,1}_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)=\frac{d
y^0_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)}{d z}+m_2y^0_{j-1}(\zeta^-_j,\mu)$.

Knowledge of the kernel $K(z,s)$  determines the solution of the
inverse problem (26)--(28), that is, the function  $q(z)$ and the
constants $h$, $H$. The further reasoning is almost word for word
in Section \textbf{I}.

\textbf{Conclusion.} The paper presents a new approach in
determining the eigenvalues of the elliptic operator of the
initial-boundary value problem (including peculiarities) for an
equation of parabolic type over the cross section for solving this
equation at the internal point of the spatial coordinate change
(statements of Theorems 1, 2). This made it possible to use the
classical results of recovering the Sturm---Liouville operator
from spectral characteristics [1--3, 7] and the subsequent
solution of the inverse problem for a parabolic equation. Note
that the results obtained complement (and in a certain sense,
develop) the ideas and research presented in [16--18] when
analyzing the questions of solvability of multidimensional
systems. Recent results in the direction of analyzing evolutionary
systems in network-like regions (see [19--21]) allow partial use
of the results of this work in constructing stabilizing control
actions in complex articulations. It should also be noted that the
approaches to the analysis of dynamic systems presented in
[22--26] allow partial use of the results of this work, namely,
the widespread use of operational calculus techniques.


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{03/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{03/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
