

\noindent{\small UDC 51.76  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 92D30

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf HIV incidence in Russia: SIR epidemic model-based analysis%$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it  S.~V. Sokolov$\,^1$%
, A.~L. Sokolova$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%

}

\efootnote{
%%
\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ M. V. Bulatov and E. V. Chistyakova
%acknowledge the financial support from the Russian Foun\-dation
%for Basic Research (projects N 18-51-54001,  18-01-00643,
%18-29-10019).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum16 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum16}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9, Universitetskaya nab.,
St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
St.\,Petersburg State Electrotechnical University ``LETI'', 5, ul.
Professora Popova, St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
197376, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:} Sokolov S. V., Sokolova
A. L. HIV incidence in Russia: SIR epidemic model-based analysis.
{\it Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied Mathematics.
Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear, vol.~15,
iss.~\issuenum,
pp.~\pageref{p16}--\pageref{p16e}. %\\
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum16

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent The problem of predicting the incidence
rate of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in Russia is
considered. The official morbidity levels were taken as initial
data; for numerical modelling, the SIR model was applied to take
into account the birth rate, mortality, as well as
chemoprophylaxis and isolation of a group of infected but not
epidemically dangerous patients. The search for the coefficients
of the model is examined in detail using gradient descent with an
auxiliary system applied. Various scenarios of the epidemic
development are estimated, depending on the percentage of the
number of patients who are undergoing therapy. The consequences of
achieving the goals of the UNAIDS strategy 90--90--90 (90\,$\%$
people who are aware of their status, 90\,$\%$ among them are on
HIV treatment and 90\,$\%$ among them are virally suppressed) are
described. It is shown that upon reaching the target levels of
involvement of patients in anti-epidemic measures, the number of
infected people can be kept within $1\,\% $ of the total
population
with a further decrease.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: HIV, math modeling, predicting, incidence.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


{\bf Introduction.} The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
infection is a disease that causes a gradual decrease in the
general immunity of a person, as a result the body loses its
ability to resist pathogenic bacteria. The last stage in the
development of HIV infection, in which the destruction of vital
systems of the body occurs, is Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
(AIDS).

The scale of the HIV epidemic is relatively small in Russia, the
number of infected reaches 1.3 million people [1], but it keeps
growing [2]. At the same time, the annual incidence is very high
--- in 2018, about 100 thousand new cases were detected. In terms
of the number of new infections to the population, Russia holds a
leading position in the world.

Cases of complete cure for HIV infection after stem cell
transplantation are known [3], but they are single, prohibitively
expensive and thus can be neglected, assuming that HIV infection
is almost incurable in Russia. Without supportive therapy, on
average after 5--10~years, HIV infection leads to the development
of AIDS and death.

Therapy, which prolongs the life and working capacity of an
HIV-infected individual, is expensive, and the spread of HIV
entails serious economic losses. Thus, an important task is to
control the spread of HIV infection. Large funds are allocated for
the study of epidemic mechanisms and methods of counteraction, the
development of a vaccine and drugs. Another task is to reduce the
number of new cases, i.~e. infection prevention. One more goal to
achieve is to support individuals already infected with HIV:
prolonging and improving their quality of life.

The life expectancy of HIV infected patients varies considerably,
depending on many factors: age, lifestyle, emotional state, region
of residence, history of chronic diseases, etc. The average life
expectancy (with no curation) is about~9--11 years from the moment
of infection. In case of treatment and required regime refusal,
life expectancy is reduced to 2--5~years. There are also known
cases when people have lived with the virus for quite a long
time~--- more than 40~years from the moment of infection.

This paper analyzes the key features of HIV infection and disease
statistics in Russia for the further use of this information for
the epidemic course prediction. Much attention is paid to the peak
of the epidemic~--- the moment of the maximum number of infected
people.

{\bf Literature review.} One of the most famous works on
mathematical modeling of the spread of diseases [4], describes the
dynamics of the epidemiological process using a system of
differential equations, the solutions of which characterize the
dynamics of changes in the number of subgroups in the population
in question. Kermak and McKendrick introduced one of the simplest
models of the dynamics of the epidemic~--- the SIR model, which
considers three groups of individuals: susceptible to the disease
$ S (t) $ (Suspectible), infected $ I (t) $ (Infected) and $ R (t)
$ (Removed) dropped out from the group due to recovery or death.

The analytical solution of the SIR model, as well as its
modification taking into account fertility and mortality, are
considered in~[5].

There are many models examining the division of a population into
a larger number of different groups of individuals, depending on
the stage of the disease, the presence of immunity, etc.

In addition to the three groups of SIR models the article~[6]
discusses the MSEIR disease spread model, which introduces a group
of individuals with passive immunity from birth ($M$) and a group
of individuals in the latent stage of infection ($E$), when the
virus has already entered the body, but the disease has not yet
begun to manifest, and the individual is not able to spread the
disease.

In [7] the SIR model of the dynamics of the epidemic, various
modifications of the model: taking into account fertility and
mortality, the virulence of the pathogen, the latent phase of the
disease are considered. The types of anti-epidemic measures are
also described with examples of their application and
optimization. Among other things, measures are being taken to
control the HIV epidemic, such as chemoprophylaxis and isolation
of patients.

A lot of existing HIV models consider heterogeneous models,
dividing populations into different risk groups. In this case,
basically two stages are considered --- susceptibility to the
disease and infection. One of such models was considered in [8].
In this model, there are three risk groups: the core of the
infection (people most at risk of infection due to risky
behavior), the bridge group (people in contact with both the
nuclear group and the rest of the population) and the main
population (non-core people or bridge group).

The main problem of such models is a large number of uncertain
parameters, the errors in the determination of which significantly
affect the simulation result.


{\bf The problem formulation.} A feature of HIV statistics is the
lack of accuracy in the coefficients of the equations. We propose
a simple mathematical model with small amount of coefficients and
focus on the most accurate determination of parameters.

For analysis, we take statistics on the incidence of HIV infection
in Russia for 2008--2018. Earlier data are less accurate due to
the low degree of awareness of HIV infection in that period and
may adversely affect the accuracy of the resulting model.\newpage

HIV statistics in Russia for 2008--2018 is presented in the
following form:
%
%\noindent
\begin{center}
{\footnotesize
\begin{tabular}{lccccccccccc} %\hline
Year\,.... & 2008 &2009 & 2010 & 2011 &2012&2013&2014&2015&2016&2017 &2018\\
%\hline
HIV, $\%$& 0,31 & 0,33  & 0,36 & 0,37 & 0,41 & 0,45 & 0,50 & 0,54 & 0,60 & 0,64& 0,69\\
%\hline HIV, $\%$& 0,305 & 0,332  & 0,366 & 0,371 & 0,412 & 0,452 & 0,495 & 0,539 & 0,593 & 0,643& 0,686\\
%\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}

The main goal of this work is to develop a forecast for the
disease spread.

{\bf Coefficients identification.} Let us consider the simplest
SIR model first:

\begin{equation*}
\begin{cases}
    \dot S(t) = - \beta I(t)S(t),
    \\
    \dot I(t) = \beta I(t)S(t) - \gamma I(t),
    \\
   \dot R(t) = \gamma I(t),
 \end{cases}
 \label{eq1}
\end{equation*}
$$S(t)+I(t)+R(t)=N>0, \ S(t_0)=S_0>0, \ I(t_0)=I_0>0, \ R(t_0)=R_0 \geq 0,\ \beta > 0, \ \gamma >0.$$
In order to consider the shares of the total number of
individuals, we take $ N = 1 $. Thus, each of the values will
correspond not to the size of the group, but to its share of the
total number.

Since the number of people who died from AIDS at 2008--2018 is
known, one can calculate
$$\gamma=\frac{R(2018)-R(2008)}{\int_{2008}^{2018}I(t)dt}\approx 0.05.$$

Since $1/\gamma\approx 20$ in SIR model is the average life
expectancy, this value reflects the fact that approximately half
of the patients receive therapy and this does not lead to a
decrease in their life expectancy.

For a qualitative assessment of the epidemiological situation, it
is necessary to have sufficiently accurately estimated parameters
of the model under consideration. To find them, statistical data
on the disease are used. In the SIR model, we are interested in
the coefficient $\beta.$ To obtain the model coefficients for a
number of measurements, we solve the following problem.

Let $k$ be the number of available measurements of the number of
people infected with HIV in Russia by year. Thus, we have $ k $
values $I_1, I_2, \dots, I_i, \dots, I_k $.

For different $\beta, I_0,$ the system will have different
solutions. It is necessary to select such values of these
parameters so that the error in the solution obtained, when
comparing with real statistics is minimal, so that
$$ \sum_{i = i}^{k} [I (t_i) -I_i]^2 \to 0, $$
where $ I (t_i) $ is the solution of the system for $I(t)$ for
fixed $\beta, I_0 $.

Using a grid of the values of $ \beta$ and $ I_0,$ solving the
corresponding systems numerically, we obtain approximate value for
available data: $\beta = 0.13.$

More accurate approximation can be achieved using local minimum
search met\-hods~[9].

Consider the first two equations of the system. Rewrite the system
in the form

\begin{equation*}
 \begin{cases}
   \dot{S}=-\beta IS=f_1(S, I, \beta),
   \\
   \dot{I}=\beta IS-\gamma I=f_2(S,I,\beta)
 \end{cases}
\end{equation*}
%
with initial values $S(0)=S_0,~ I(0)=I_0.$

The method is based on minimisation of the function
$$\Phi(\beta) = \dfrac{1}{2} \sum_{i=1}^{11} \left(I(t_i, \beta)-I_i\right )^2.$$
Gradient equations have the form
\begin{equation*}
 \dfrac{d\beta}{d\tau} = \dfrac{\partial \Phi(\beta)}{\partial \beta} = - \sum_{i=1}^{10} (I(t_i, \beta) - I_i) y_{11} (t_i)
\end{equation*}
with auxiliary equation
\begin{equation*}
 \begin{cases}
   \dot y_{1} = -IS -\beta I y_{1} - \beta S y_{2},
   \\
   \dot y_{2}  = IS + \beta I y_{1} + (\beta S-\gamma)y_{2},
 \end{cases}
\end{equation*}
$$y_{1}(0)=y_{2}(0)=0.$$

As the initial data, we use the previously obtained approximation
$\beta\approx 0.13.$


The solution of the Cauchy problem for gradient equation with
respect to the system approaches a certain local minimum, in which
$\beta $ take optimal value (Figure~1).

%\begin{figure}[ht]
%\begin{center}
%\scalebox{0.8}{
%   \includegraphics{beta-tau2.png}
%}
%
%\caption{ \label{graph-fig1}
%     Solution of the Cauchy problem}
%\end {center}
%\end {figure}


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=0.95]{16/fig1}

\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 1.} Solution of the Cauchy problem}
}
\end{figure}


For different initial conditions, the solution can converge to
different local minima. Therefore, a preliminary search for the
approximate global minimum is  necessary.

As a result, we obtain a more accurate value of the coefficient
$\beta = 0.1322$ (in this problem it is not local but global
minimum).

{\bf SIR model with fertility and mortality rate, chemoprophylaxis
and iso\-lation.} More accurate prediction of the epidemiological
situation requires taking into account additional factors. One of
these factors is the demographic situation in the
country:\linebreak\newpage\noindent there is a generational change
that affects the size of a particular group of individuals in
mathematical models. Thus, fertility and mortality rates should be
take into account.

For HIV infection, unlike many diseases, a vertical transmission
mechanism is characteristic: infected mothers are more likely to
have already infected children. Thus, the influx of individuals
into the group of susceptible individuals will occur both at the
expense of the susceptible and at the expense of a certain
proportion of the infected. The inflow and outflow in the group of
retired individuals for HIV infection does not occur, i.~e. for
this disease, this group characterizes the number of individuals
who died from the disease. The outflow from the other two groups
added to consideration should take into account the death of
people from all the other factors.

In addition to $\beta $ and $\gamma $, the following coefficients
are also present in the new model: $\alpha>0, \mu>0 $~---
fertility and mortality rate in the country (average value of the
number of newborns per year per individual), $\varphi_1> 0 $~---
the probability to give birth a healthy child for an infected
mother. According to statistics, the average probability is $
\varphi_1 \approx 0.7 $ [10].

To consider the epidemiological situation in Russia, we take the
average value of these coefficients over the past 11 years: $
\alpha = 0.01272,\, \mu = 0.01344. $


Chemoprophylaxis in the general case is the prevention of the
development of the disease in the early stages of infection. In
the case of HIV infection, there are two areas of
chemoprophylaxis.

1.\,\,Chemoprophylaxis of parenteral and sexual infection. Such
methods have been developed primarily for prophylaxis in health
workers who have been exposed to infected blood on the mucous
membrane or who have been injured by an HIV-contaminated tool. The
effectiveness of the use has been proven,  as a result the risk of
infection is significantly reduced. The onset of chemoprophylaxis
is considered inconsistent if more than 72 hours have passed since
the infection. It can also be used for sexually transmitted
infections or for transfusion of blood infected with HIV.

2.\,\,Decrease in probability of giving birth to an infected child
in a HIV-infected mother. This method of prevention on average
reduces the risk of infection with a vertical transmission
mechanism to 8 $\%.$ Thus, under chemoprophylaxis
$\varphi_2=0.92.$

For HIV infection, the following interpretation of isolation is
relevant. A part of infected individuals after the diagnosis of
the disease changes their lifestyle, limiting themselves in
actions that can cause infection of others. Thus, they move into a
group of isolated individuals $I_{is}$ who are not able to spread
the infection. In this group the coefficient, characterizing the
probability of having a healthy child will be higher due to the
use of chemoprophylaxis.

Consider the coefficient $\omega,$ which characterizes the
probability of transition from infected group to a group of
isolated ones.  By increasing this probability, the course of the
epidemic can be positively affected. The main factors for this
value to depend on are timely diagnosis of the disease and the
conscious behaviour of infected individuals, in which they limit
themselves to actions dangerous for the environment.

Launched in 2014, the UNAIDS Fast-Track strategy outlined plans to
step up the HIV response in low- and middle-income countries to
meet the SDG 3 target to end AIDS by 2030 [11]. The strategy
acknowledges that, without rapid scale-up, the HIV epidemic will
continue to outrun the response. To prevent this, it underlines
the need to reduce new HIV infections and AIDS related deaths by
90\,$\%$ by 2030, compared to 2010 levels. To achieve this, the
Fast-Track strategy sets out targets for prevention and treatment,
known as the 90--90--90 targets (90\,$\%$ people who are aware of
their status, 90\,$\%$ among them are on HIV treatment and
90\,$\%$ among them are virally suppressed, the latter we will
refer to as isolated, the product still gives only 73\,$\%$ of all
infected population). The Russian HIV 2020 programm should have
achieved the same results up to 2020 [12], but it is evident that
it fails since only 42\,$\%$ of infected are on HIV treatment and
less than 25\,$\%$ are annually tested. This gives $\omega$ not
exceed~0.1.

The transition diagram for this model is presented in Figure~2.

%\begin{figure}[ht]
%\begin{center}
%\scalebox{0.6}{
%   \includegraphics{isobd.png}
%} \caption{ \label{graph-fig2}
%     Transition diagram for a model with isolation, chemoprophylaxis, and birth and death rates
%}
%\end {center}
%\end {figure}


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{16/fig2}

\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 2.} Transition diagram for a model
with isolation, chemoprophylaxis,\\ and birth and death rates} }
\end{figure}


The model with isolation of patients, chemoprophylaxis and
fertility and mortality rates will be the following:

\vskip 2mm

\begin{equation*}
\begin{cases}
    \dfrac{dS(t)}{dt} = - \beta I(t)S(t) + \dfrac{\alpha(S(t)+\varphi_2 I_{is}(t)+\varphi_1 I(t))-\mu S(t)}{S(t)+I(t)+I_{is}(t)},
    \\[0.4cm]
    \dfrac{dI(t)}{dt} = \beta I(t)S(t) - \gamma I(t) + \dfrac{\alpha(1-\varphi_1)I(t)-\mu I(t)}{S(t)+I(t)+I_{is}(t)} - \omega I(t),
    \\[0.4cm]
    \dfrac{dI_{is}(t)}{dt} = \omega I(t) - \gamma I_{is}(t) + \dfrac{\alpha(1-\varphi_2)I_{is}(t)-\mu I_{is}(t)}{S(t)+I(t)+I_{is}(t)} ,
    \\[0.4cm]
    \dfrac{dR(t)}{dt} = \gamma (I(t) + I_{is}(t)).
 \end{cases}
\end{equation*}

\vskip 2mm

Using the technique developed above, the most probable
$\beta=0.21.$ The simulation shows almost linear increase of the
total number of infected up to 6\,$\%$ of population to the end of
the century.

Let us suppose more realistic scenario of increasing $\omega$ in
the nearest future according  to  HIV 2020 programm. Figure~3
shows graphs of the development of the epidemic for various values
of $\omega.$ It is clear that even double increase $\omega$ to 0.2
leads to a rapid decline in the epidemic up to late 2020th.
%\newpage

%\begin{figure}[ht]
%\begin{center}
%\scalebox{0.8}{
%   \includegraphics{omega2.png}
%} \caption{ \label{graph-fig}
%     The development of the epidemic with different values of $\omega$
%}
%\end {center}
%\end {figure}


{\bf Conclusion.} Based on the results of the research that has
been carried out it is possible to describe three potential
epidemic development scenarios.

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=0.95]{16/fig3}

\vskip 1mm {\small{\it Figure 3.} The development of the epidemic
with different values of $\omega$} }
\end{figure}


In case the existing epidemic factors  keep influencing (e.~g.
having only 40\,$\%$ infected on HIV treatment), the country will
face a large-scale epidemic with the total number of infected
reaching 6\,$\%$ by the end of the century.

In case of an increase of the amount of infected on HIV treatment
up to 50--60\,$\%,$ a gradual decrease of the total number of
infected reaching 1.0--1.5\,$\%.$ by 2040th can be expected.

In case the goals of the UNAIDS Fast-Track strategy are achieved,
the epidemiс level will start downsizing having reached its peak
value not exceeding 1\,$\%$ in the beginning of 2020th.




%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{16/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{16/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize


%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
