
\noindent{\small   MSC 65Z-05\hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика. Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
UDC 629.439:4.027.3:621.313.282:538.945

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Simulations of maglev EDS performance with detailed numerical models%$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it V.~M.~Amoskov$\,^1$, D.~N.~Arslanova$\,^1$,
A.~M.~Bazarov$\,^1$, A.~V.~Belov$\,^1$, V.~A.~Belyakov$\,^{1,2}$,
A.~A.~Firsov$\,^1$, E.~I.~Gapionok$\,^1$, M.~V.~Kaparkova$\,^1$,
V.~P.~Kukhtin$\,^1$, E.~A.~Lamzin$\,^1$, M.~S.~Larionov$\,^1$,
A.~V.~Mizintzev$\,^3$, V.~M.~Mikhailov$\,^1$,
A.~N.~Nezhentzev$\,^1$, D.~A.~Ov-\linebreak syannikov$\,^2$,
A.~D.~Ovsyannikov$\,^2$, I.~Yu.~Rodin$\,^1$, N.~A.~Shatil$\,^1$,
S.~E.~Sytchevsky$\,^{1,2}$, V.~N.~Vasiliev$\,^1$,
M.~Yu.~Zenkevich$\,^4$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
}

\efootnote{
%%
%\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ Работа выполнена при
%финансовой поддержке Российского фонда фундаментальных
%исследований (грант № ?).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum02 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum02}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
JSC ``NIIEFA'', 3, Doroga na Metallostroy, St.~Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
196641, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9, Universitetskaya nab.,
St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^3$~%
NIIEFA-ENERGO Ltd, 5, Doroga na Metallostroy, St. Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
196641, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^4$~%
General A.~Khrulyov Academy of Rear Services of Armed Forces, 8,
Makarov nab., St. Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:} Amoskov V.~M., Arslanova
D.~N., Bazarov A.~M., Belov A.~V., Belyakov V.~A., Firsov A.~A.,
Gapionok E.~I. , Kaparkova M.~V., Kukhtin V.~P., Lamzin E.~A.,
Larionov M.~S., Mizintzev A.~V., Mikhailov V.~M., Nezhentzev
A.~N., Ovsyannikov D.~A., Ovsyannikov A.~D., Rodin I.~Yu., Shatil
N.~A., Sytchevsky S.~E., Vasiliev V.~N., Zenkevich M.~Yu.
Simulations of maglev EDS performance with detailed numerical
models. {\it Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied
Mathematics. Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear,
vol.~14, iss.~\issuenum, pp.~\pageref{p2}--\pageref{p2e}.
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum02

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent This article finalizes the feasibility
analysis of electrodynamic suspension systems (EDS) for
magnetically levitated (maglev) transport. Parametric simulations
for a range of EDS configurations were justified in comparison
with evaluations from basic theoretical works of Russian authors.
The electromagnetic behaviour of EDS components was simulated
using detailed numerical models and original software oriented to
parallel computations on multi-processor platforms. Results of
computations were compared to measurements on scaled prototypes
and data obtained at Inductrack experiments in the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. A desired accuracy of the
simulation was demonstrated that proved reliability of the virtual
prototyping and enabled scaling of the operational parameters with
respect to the power consumption, load capacity, tolerances and
other
characteristics of real levitated vehicles.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: magnetic levitation, vehicle, electromagnetic
suspension, electrodynamic suspen\-sion, hybrid suspension,
simulation, prototype, finite elements, computational technique,
3D modelling, magnetic field, eddy current, lifting and drag
forces, normalized power, superconducting coil, permanent magnet.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\bf Introduction.} In Russia the maglev technologies [1]
developed basically in national studies [2--4] have not been
implemented into operational transportation systems so far.
Meanwhile, maglev transport in China, Korea, Japan, Germany, and
other countries is successfully run in service. Practical
implementation of the maglev technologies is a response to rapid
increase of traffic volume. Advantages of the novel transport are,
however, accompanied with a demand for efficient realization to
compete economically with conventional wheeled transport. Product
and maintenance analyses suggest that commercial maglev projects
require high initial investments to guideway structures and
rolling stock. To provide high maglev performance and ensure a
cost-effective project with an acceptable payback period,
parametric studies and virtual prototyping combined with sub-scale
and full-scale testing are the forefront of all design stages.

Efficiency of suspension systems for magnetic levitation has
recently progressed with advance in superconductors, magnetic and
composite materials, control technology, and power supply. This
paper is devoted to the analysis and optimization of
electro-dynamic suspension (EDS) systems based on a coordinated
modelling-and-test approach. Parametric simulations, aimed to
identify the system design and operation, are followed with the
construction of scaled models and measurements on a test bench to
verify the computational models and optimize the design.

A series of detailed 3D numerical models was built for components
of EDS. Original computational algorithms and software tools
developed for EM simulations of magnet systems in accelerators and
tokamaks [5, 6] were adapted to maglev studies. The models and
computational techniques were verified in comparison of
independent simulations with~a~series of computer codes [7--10],
analytical estimations [2--4, 11], and experimental data~[7--10].

Parametric simulations were accomplished for over 2000
configurations of the maglev track and onboard magnets, and the
speed ranges up to the triple sonic speed. Vectorized parallel
computations on a multi-core supercomputer [12] were utilized to
retrieve and process data to form a massive database. That enabled
optimization of the EDS parameters prior to actual prototyping
that resulted in sufficient savings of cost and materials. Such
approach has proved to be an efficient and versatile way to mature
the design.

The study was aimed to assess the basic operating parameters of
the EDS and hybrid suspension configurations [13], evaluate their
energy consumption and allowable manufacture tolerances.

{\bf Electrodynamic suspension.} The electrodynamic suspension
technology [2--4], or repulsive levitation, is based on the
electromagnetic interaction between a moving magnetic field source
and currents induced in a conductive track. Resulting repulsive
force lifts the vehicle.

An EDS is characterised by spatial and temporal distributions of
magnetic fields, eddy currents, generated heat, and Lorentz
forces. These distributions are non-uniform due to geometrical,
magnetic, electric, and kinetic parameters of the system [2--4].
To calculate~the distributions, detailed 3D computational models
[7--10] may be applied. In a~simplified~way, the repulsive
levitation can be described via an integral (resultant) force
acting on a field source. In the Cartezian coordinates this force
is determined by following components:

1) lift force $F_z$, which is counter-directed to the gravity
force;

2) drag force $F_x$ acting opposite to the speed vector;

3) lateral force $F_y$ that causes sideward displacement thus
destabilizing the vehicle.

By the magnets, EDS may be divided into two types: with the
superconducting magnets (SCM) [2--4] and with permanent magnets
(PM), such as the Inductrack system [14--19] that utilizes the
Halbach arrays [20]. Previous studies were devoted
to~electromagnetic analysis of EDS and validation of computational
models [7--10]. Figu\-res~\mbox{1--4} illustrate schematics and FE
meshing for two EDS principal concepts: the normal-flux system and
the null-flux system. The null-flux concept utilizes flux
cancellation through the on-board magnet in position with respect
to the track structures. This is opposed to the normal-flux
concept, where there is no flux cancellation.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig1-4


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig1}
\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 1.} Normal-flux EDS. Suspended SCM
is modelled via current loops\\ positioned above continuous aluminium track } \\

\vskip 0mm {\footnotesize {\em a} --- side view;  {\em b} --- top
view. Dimensions are given in millimeters.} }
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig2}
\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 2.} Normal-flux EDS with dual
Halbach array of PMs and laminated track } \\

\vskip .5mm {\footnotesize Sizes and arrangement correspond to
LLNL Test Rig (Livermore, USA) [18]. \\

\vskip .5mm Dimensions are given in millimeters.\\ } }
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig3}
\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 3.} Null-flux EDS with discrete track } \\

\vskip 0mm {\footnotesize Asymmetric double-loop suspension coils
are mounted vertically along guideway\\ with shift d$y<0$ (side
view).\\ } }
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig4}
\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 4.} FE model of null-flux EDS with
double-loop coils on discrete track } \\

\vskip 0mm {\footnotesize Each coil is wound by seven layers.} }
\end{figure}



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig1-4


%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=13.75cm]{Fig01.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~1}. Normal-flux EDS. Suspended SCM is modelled
%via current loops positioned above continuous aluminium track.
%{\em a} -- side view,  {\em b} -- top view. Dimensions are given
%in millimeters.
%\end{figure}
%
%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=15.5cm]{Fig02.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~2}. Normal-flux EDS with dual Halbach array of
%PMs and laminated track. Sizes and arrangement correspond to LLNL
%Test Rig (Livermore, USA) [18]. Dimensions are given in
%millimeters.
%\end{figure}
%\clearpage
%
%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=15.75cm]{Fig03.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~3}. Null-flux EDS with discrete track.
%Asymmetric double-loop suspension coils are mounted vertically
%along guideway with shift d$y<0$. Side view.
%\end{figure}
%
%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=15.6cm]{Fig04.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~4}. FE model of null-flux EDS with double-loop
%coils on discrete track. Each coil is wound by seven layers
%\end{figure}

This paper succeeds to the previous studies on suspensions systems
for maglev transport [7--10]. Our developments encompass:

$\bullet$ matured numerical technology for analysis of EDS in
terms of spatial and temporal variations of the magnetic field,
eddy current, Lorentz force density, heat release, and material
properties;

$\bullet$ predictive simulations of basic operating modes
including abnormal conditions;

$\bullet$ numerical modelling with desired accuracy for all types
of magnets used in EDS (electromagnets (EM), PM, SCM) individually
or in combinations;

$\bullet$ ambient field mapping to ensure the health and ecology
safety;

$\bullet$ certified original software (KLONDIKE, TYPHOON, TORNADO,
KOMPOT) \mbox{[21--24]} executable on the Russian multi-core
supercomputer [12];

$\bullet$ consistent database of simulated EDS parameters and
numerical model validated against experiments and analytical
estimations [2--4].

As a result, a basis is formed to identify design criteria,
configuration and ma-\linebreak nufacturing tolerances for
components of EDS, assign design guidelines, and synthesize an
optimized EDS.

{\bf Validation of computational models.} Numerical models for
basic EDS con-\linebreak figurations were validated in comparative
simulations with FE codes TYPHOON and TORNADO utilizing different
approximations for the solution. A difference between the
estimates of the lift and drag forces was found to be below 2.4\%
over the operating speed range.

The models of guideway structures were validated in simulations
with the codes TYPHOON and KLONDIKE assuming perfect conductivity
of the track material. This corresponds to the maximal lift force
reached asymptotically with increasing speed. The comparison of
results gave the difference as low as 0.2\%. This value can be
treated as the FE approximation error.

Also, the simulated results were compared [8] with the
experimental data obtained at the LLNL Test Rig [18, 19]. The Test
Rig (see Fig.~2) was built in the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (USA) as a part of the development of the Inductrack
technology to check the computer calculations and investigate
performance of different laminated track configurations. Figure~5
illustrates a comparison between the data obtained with NIIEFA
numerical model [7--9] and LLNL measurements on the Test Rig.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig5


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig5}
\vskip -1mm {\small{\it Figure 5.} Lift force ({\em a}) and drug
force ({\em b}) vs speed } \\

\vskip 0mm {\footnotesize {\em 1} --- LLNL experimental data [18];
{\em 2}~--- LLNL simulation for reference position [18];\\ {\em
3,~4}~--- LLNL simulations for $\pm1$~mm shifted positions [18];
{\em 5}~--- NIIEFA simulation [7--10].\\ } }
\end{figure}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig5


%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=15.0cm]{Fig05.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~5}. Lift force ({\em a}) and drug force ({\em
%b}) vs speed: {\em 1} -- LLNL experimental data [18]; {\em 2} --
%LLNL simulation for reference position [18]; {\em 3,4} -- LLNL
%simulations for $\pm1$~mm shifted positions [18]; {\em 5} --
%NIIEFA simulation [7-10].
%\end{figure}

To conform with the Test Rig parameters, our simulations were
limited to a low speed range up to 10~m/s.

At a middle-to-high speed range the lift force would grow
asymptotically approaching a peak value dictated by the EDS
configuration. The peak lift force can be determined by solving
the nonstationary Cauchy problem for distributed eddy currents or
the relevant magnetostatic problem using the method of images.

The numerical analysis has also been supported with measurements
on a scaled EDS model with a limited functionality. The model was
primarily intended to verify the computational models using
results of magnetic measurements on a statically suspended
vehicle. Suspension was created by mutual repulsion of two blocks
of permanent magnets, that imitates the asymptotic behaviour of a
PM EDS with a halved lifting gap at infinite speed. Such
suspension system is unstable [11] and, therefore, unpractical but
suitable for testing.

The virtual prototyping with detailed FE models enable us to
escape expensive speedup experiments on a full-scale model, such
as direct EM force measurement on a flat freight car. In
combination with parametric simulations, the scaled model provides
reliable scaling of the simulated operational parameters with
respect to the practical load capacity and other characteristics.
Such method gives quite accurate and abundant information at a low
cost.

The basic electromagnetic parameters and lifting gap of the scaled
model were taken similar to those of a real EDS maglev vehicle.
The sizes of the suspended platform corresponded to a standard
bogie. The distance between the track axes is 1190~mm that is
close to realistic guideways. Experiments on the scaled EDS model
were aimed to verify the manufacturing tolerances and check the
performance of PM blocks manufactured at NIIEFA for maglev
application. Each PM block is formed by an NdFeB PM array
sandwiched between two magnetic steel plates. The block is
encapsulated in a nonmagnetic stainless steel case. During the
experiments the PM block assembly/mounting procedures were
adjusted. Also, electromagnetic compatibility of EDS components
was tested.

The scaled EDS model was in static suspension for the period of 12
months. Further on, the model and the test bench will be used for
long-term operational tests of the instrumentation and control
system and estimation of their operating life.

The field map of the scaled EDS model is topologically equivalent
to a field distribution of both the PM EDS and SCM EDS. This makes
it possible to use the model for studies of SC EDS utilizing
high-temperature superconductors (HTSC).

Figures~6, 7 illustrate the scaled EDS model on the test bench.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig6-7

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1.05]{02/fig6-7}
}
\vskip 0mm%
\noindent\begin{minipage}[c]{6.0cm}\centering{ {\small{\em
Figure~6.} Scaled
EDS model}\\
{\footnotesize{\em 1}~--- levitated platform; {\em 2}~--- cased PM
blocks;\\ {\em 3}~--- immovable way structure; {\em 4}~---
tracks.\\ }  }
\end{minipage} \hskip 5mm
\noindent\begin{minipage}[c]{7.0cm}\centering{  {\small{\em
Figure~7.} Test of HTSC modules}\\ {\footnotesize{\em 1}~---
nitrogen cryostats; {\em 2}~--- levitated platform;\\ {\em 3}~---
aluminum shapes; {\em 4}~--- support rollers.\\ } }
\end{minipage}
\end{figure}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig6-7

%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%\begin{tabular}{cc}
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig06.png} &
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig07.jpeg} \\
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~6}. Scaled EDS model: {\em 1} --
%levitated platform, {\em 2} -- cased PM blocks, {\em 3} --
%immovable way structure, {\em 4} -- tracks.
%\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~7}. Test of HTSC modules:
%{\em 1} -- nitrogen cryostats, {\em 2} -- levitated platform, {\em
%3} -- aluminum shapes, {\em 4} -- support rollers.
%\end{minipage}
%\end{tabular}
%\end{center}
%\end{figure}

The steel tracks are installed on transverse supports and equipped
with cased PM blocks. Measurements are performed with force gauges
and air gap sensors. The auxiliary equipment includes a trolley
drive mechanism, a sideward displacement compensator, a backlash
compensator. The levitated platform can move vertically (along the
axis $Z$) and horizontally (along the axis $X$) at any tilt
relative to the tracks. The transverse displacement of the
platform (along axis $Y$) is limited by the guides.

In the experiments~3 cased PM blocks were mounted on each track.
In the reference position the platform was set so that its middle
PM blocks were exactly above the midd-\linebreak le PM blocks of
the tracks. According to the preliminary calculation, the lift
force of sus-\linebreak pension in the reference position would be
much higher than the drag and sideward forces.

The lift force was measured at different vertical and horizontal
positions of the levitated platform. The transverse shift of the
platform was eliminated by the sideward displacement compensator.
The force gauges with a measuring accuracy of 0.1\% were installed
at the platform corners. The air gap between the platform and the
tracks was varied with 4 tightening screw.\par
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig8
%
\begin{wrapfigure}[18]{o}{60mm}
\centering \vspace*{-2mm}
\noindent\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig8} \vskip .5mm
%\centerline%
{\small {\it Figure~8.} Lift force $F_z$ vs air gap $\Delta z$\\ %
 for scaled EDS model (solid curve~--– \\ %
 calculated results, dots~--– measurements,\\ %
 dashed\,\,curves\,\,indicate $\pm 5$\% discrepancy\\ %
 about calculated estimate) \\ }
\end{wrapfigure}
\indent The resultant vertical force was determined at each
position by summation of the force gauge readings, the total
weight of the platform with the cased PM blocks, and the weight of
the load placed on the platform. A series of measurements was
taken for each air gap size, and the lift force was derived as the
mean value. The measurement uncertainty was 2--3\%. \par

Figure~8 presents calculated and measured lift force for the
scaled EDS model. The discrepancy between the estimates is as low
as $\pm 5$\%, the maximal difference being occurred at the minimal
absolute value of the lift force. Recently, the scaled EDS model
was modified by installing 4 cased PM blocks at the levitated
platform instead of 3 as in the previous option. The platform can
be moved along the tracks within the distance of 1.6~m.


The measured data were compared to the lift force simulated with
different numerical models using 4 EM codes [7--10]. The
computational models were found to give reliable predictions. This
enabled verification of the numerical procedures for scaling
operating parameters for practical applications thus making R\&D
of real EDS flexible and efficient.

{\bf Generalized characteristics of EDS maglev system.} When in
motion, the value and density of eddy current induced by the
suspended magnet in the tracks depend on the magnetic flux in the
air gap and the propulsion speed of the maglev vehicle. Further
on, for qualitative analysis the track will be approximated as a
flat conducting band. The induced eddy current can be described
via a closed current loop or a set of such loops using the
electrical circuit theory.

Basic concepts of magnetic levitation [2--4] and predictive EM
simulations [7--10] lead to the following generalization.

The induced current varies proportionally to the rate of change of
the flux in the air gap and inversely to the current loop
impedance. As the magnetic flux variations result from the motion
of the magnet, emf in the track is proportional to the speed. The
current impedance is determined by the ohmic resistance and
reactance.

The ohmic resistance $R$ depends on the track material
conductivity and the current distribution. Reactance $\omega L$ is
a function of the loop self-inductance $L$ and the frequency
$\omega$ of the field change. At a low speed, when the effective
thickness of the skin layer [25,~26] exceeds the track thickness,
the~ohmic resistance is constant and independent on the~propulsion
speed. In contrast, the~reactance grows linearly with the
frequency of the~flux change and, therefore, is proportional to
the speed. At low speed and low frequency, the main contributor to
the impedance is the ohmic resistance. Then, at a steady motion of
the levitated magnet along the track, the eddy current amplitude
is proportional to the~speed.

With growing speed, the reactance also grows proportionally and
dominates in the impedance at high speed. As a result, the linear
increase of the eddy current amplitude slows down approaching the
asymptote $I_{\rm max}$.\par
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig9
%
\begin{wrapfigure}[19]{o}{65mm}
\centering %\vspace*{-2mm}
\noindent\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig9}\\% \vskip 1mm
%\centerline%
{\small {\it Figure~9.} Lift force vs propulsion\\%} \\
%\vskip 0mm\centerline{\small%
 speed at different air gaps $h$} \\
%\vskip 0mm\centerline%
{\footnotesize {\em 1}~--- $h=15$~mm; {\em
2}~--- $h=20$~mm;\\%}\\
%\vskip 0mm\centerline{\footnotesize%
 {\em 3}~--- $h=25$~mm; {\em 4}~--- $h=30$~mm;\\%}\\
%\vskip 0mm\centerline{\footnotesize%
 {\em 5}~--- $h=35$~mm.\\ }
\end{wrapfigure}
\indent Being proportional to the eddy current, the lift force
exhibits similar behaviour with speed approaching asymptotically
its upper margin, as shown in Fig.~9. These curves demonstrate the
existence of the ``transition speed'' [14, 15] for EDS maglev
systems, at which the lift force reaches a half of its asymptote
regardless of the value of the air gap. As observed, the
transition speed is prac\-ti\-cal\-ly independent of the air
gap.\par

%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%\begin{tabular}{cc}
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig08.png} &
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig09.png} \\
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~8}. Lift force $F_z$ vs air gap
%$\Delta z$ for scaled EDS model (solid curve -– calculated
%results, dots -- measurements, dashed curves indicate $\pm 5$\%
%discrepancy about calculated estimate)
%\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~9}. Lift force vs propulsion
%speed at different air gaps $h$: {\em 1} -- $h=15$~mm, {\em 2} --
%$h=20$~mm, {\em 3} -- $h=25$~mm, {\em 4} -- $h=30$~mm, {\em 5} --
%$h=35$~mm.
%\end{minipage}
%\end{tabular}
%\end{center}
%\end{figure}

The power loss $P$ due to Joule heating in the track is
proportional to its resistance and the squared current $P = I^2
R$. Since the average power $P$ dissipated in the track is given
by the product $V\cdot F_x$, the drag force can be expressed as
$F_x=P/V$. At a low speed, we can parametrize the power as $P\sim
V^2$ and the drag force as $F_x\sim V$. At a high speed (at
$I\simeq I_{\rm max}$), the power remains nearly constant under
the assumption of a constant resistivity of the track. Therefore,
$F_x\sim 1/V$. This gives a noted peak of the drag force as shown
in Fig.~10. It should be noted that, when the peak is observed,
the speed is practically independent of the air gap.

With the skin effect taken into account, resistivity grows at a
high speed as $V^{0.5}$, therefore, the drag force is estimated as
$F_x\sim V^{-0.5}$.



The maglev vehicle dynamics is principally described by the
lift-to-drag ratio [2--4]. The drag force reflects the power
required to overcome the electrodynamic drag and propel the
vehicle. The lift force is attributed to the load capacity. A
typical lift-to-drag ratio of an EDS maglev system is illustrated
in Fig.~11. %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig10-11
%
\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig10-11}
}
\vskip 2mm%
%\noindent
\begin{minipage}[c]{6.5cm} \centering {\small{\em Figure~10}. Drag
force vs propulsion
speed\\%}\\
%{\small{
at different air gaps $h$ (see Fig.~9)\\ }
\end{minipage} \hskip 5mm
\noindent\begin{minipage}[c]{6.5cm} \centering {\small{\em
Figure~11}.
Lift-to-drag ratio vs propulsion\\ %}\\ {\small
speed at different air gaps $h$ (see Fig.~9)\\ }
\end{minipage}
\end{figure}
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig10-11
As seen, the lift-to-drag ratio (levitation efficiency) increases
linearly with increasing speed and practically independent of the
air gap. However, the skin effect leads to monotonous grows of the
power loss ($\sim V^{0.5}$) thus worsening the levitation
efficiency. Figure~12 shows the power consumption per unit weight
load as a function of speed.



%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%\begin{tabular}{cc}
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig10.png} &
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig11.png} \\
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~10}. Drag force vs propulsion
%speed at different air gaps $h$ (see Fig~9)
%\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~11}. Lift-to-drag ratio vs
%propulsion speed at different air gaps $h$ (see Fig.~9)
%\end{minipage}
%\end{tabular}
%\end{center}
%\end{figure}

For the modelled EDS with flat continuous track and permanent
magnets, the power consumption is dictated by the propulsion speed
but, in the first approximation, does not depend on the loaded
weight. The weight dictates only the air gap at which the lift
force and the weight are balanced. Variations of the air gap as a
function of speed for different loads are presented in Fig.~13.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig12-13

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{02/fig12-13}
}
\vskip 2mm%
\noindent\begin{minipage}[c]{6.5cm}  \centering {\small{\em
Figure~12}.
Normalized power consumption vs\\%}\\
%{\small
propulsion speed at different loads\\ }
{\footnotesize{\em 1}~--- 15~kN; {\em 2}~--- 10~kN; {\em 3}~--- 8~kN; %}\\
%{\footnotesize
{\em 4}~--- 7~kN;\\
{\em 5}~--- 6~kN; {\em
6}~--- 5~kN; %}\\
%{\footnotesize
{\em 7}~--- 4~kN; {\em 8}~--- 3~kN. \\ }
\end{minipage} \hskip 5mm
\noindent\begin{minipage}[c]{6.5cm} \centering {\small{\em
Figure~13}. Air gap variation vs\\  propulsion %}\\ {\small
speed at different\\
loads (see Fig.~12) \\ }
\end{minipage}
\end{figure}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig12-13

%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%\begin{tabular}{cc}
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig12.png} &
%  \includegraphics[width=7.5cm]{Fig13.png} \\
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~12}. Normalized power consumption
%vs propulsion speed at different loads {\em 1} -- 15~kN, {\em 2}
%-- 10~kN, {\em 3} -- 8~kN, {\em 4} -- 7~kN, {\em 5} -- 6~kN, {\em
%6} -- 5~kN, {\em 7} -- 4~kN, {\em 8} -- 3~kN
%\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{7.5cm} \small {\em Figure~13}. Air gap variation vs
%propulsion speed at different loads (see Fig.~12)
%\end{minipage}
%\end{tabular}
%\end{center}
%\end{figure}

{\bf Evaluation of lift and drag force and linear motor thrust for
maglev train.} As previously noted, the skin effect is the main
reason for non-linear increase of the levitation efficiency with
the propulsion speed [8--10]. For the EDS maglev system with
Halbach arrays considered and a 20~mm thick flat aluminum track
the skin effect is prominent at the speed over about $3$~m/s. As
compared to the SC EDS, the Halbach-array EDS demonstrates a weak
dependence of the levitation efficiency on the air gap (see
Fig.~11). The lift of the SC EDS (see Fig.~1) reaches its
half-maximum at the speed of about $11$~m/s.

Based on the obtained results [7--10], the scaling was made to a
realistic flat freight car propelled by a linear induction motor.

The initial parameters were taken as follows:

$\bullet$ operation speed 200~km/h;

$\bullet$ load condition 50~tons;

$\bullet$ air resistance coefficient $C = 0.6$;

$\bullet$ acceleration/slowdown 0.1~m/s$^2$;

$\bullet$ upward/downward grade 70 or 10‰;

$\bullet$ number of bogies 5;

$\bullet$ every bogie is driven with a linear motor module;

$\bullet$ the track and levitation magnet arrangement is shown in
Fig.~14;

$\bullet$ EDS configurations under study:

\ \ \ \ --- Option 1. PMs configured in Halbach arrays,

\ \ \ \ --- Option 2. SC racetrack coils (1500$\times$500~mm),

\ \ \ \ --- Option 3. SC racetrack coils topologically equivalent
to the Halbach array.

The EDS arrangement presented in Fig.~14 corresponds to schematics
described in [27]. The guideway tilt of $60^\circ$ with respect to
the horizontal plane is taken so that to ensure lateral stability.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig14

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=0.8]{02/fig14}
\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 14.} Schematics of EDS maglev car}\\

\vskip 0mm {\footnotesize {\em 1}~--- guideway; {\em 2}~--- track;
{\em 3}~--- levitation magnet; {\em 4}~--- bogie. Dimensions are
given in millimeters.} }
\end{figure}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig14



%\begin{figure}[p]
%\begin{center}
%  \includegraphics[width=15.0cm]{Fig14.png}
%\end{center}
%\small {\em Figure~14}. Schematics of EDS maglev car: {\em 1} --
%guideway, {\em 2} -- track, {\em 3} -- levitation magnet, {\em 4}
%-- bogie. Dimensions are given in millimeters
%\end{figure}

A motion scenario from the standstill to the operating speed has
been simulated for 3 indicated EDS options. The results include
spatial and temporal variations of the magnetic flux, eddy
current, Lorentz force, Joule heat and other parameters. Then,
evolutions of the integral loads have been calculated for the EDS
components. The traction force of a maglev vehicle must be
assessed reasoning from the full load condition,
acceleration/deceleration, and running resistance. The running
resistance includes different components. Evaluations for each
type of running resistance are listed in Table~1. Table~2 presents
relevant power consumption.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab1

\vskip 2mm
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table 1.} {\bf Running resistance and traction force for
levitated flat freight car\\ (total weight load 500~kN, propulsion
speed 200~km/h) }

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c|c|}\hline %
Running resistance components & %
\parbox[c][1cm][c]{1.3cm}{\centering Option 1\\  Halbach\\ array} & %
\parbox[c][1cm][c]{2.0cm}{\centering \vspace{-0.6mm} Option 2 SC\\ racetrack coils\\ $1500 \times 500$~mm} & %
\parbox[c][1cm][c]{2.9cm}{\centering Option 3 SC\\ racetrack coils\\ (Halbach equivalent)} \\ \hline %
& \multicolumn{3}{c|}{kN} \\ \hline %
Electrodynamic drag & 150 & 90 & 125 \\ \hline %
Air dynamic drag & 10 & 10 &  10 \\ \hline %
Grade resistance (70‰) & 37.5 & 37.5 & 37.5 \\ \hline %
Grade resistance (10‰) & 5.36 & 5.36 & 5.36 \\ \hline %
Acceleration (0.1~m/s$^2$) & 5 & 5 & 5 \\ \hline %
Total traction force (grade 70‰) & %
202.5 & 142.5 & 177.5 \\ \hline %
Total traction force (grade 10‰) & %
170.4 & 110.4 & 145.4 \\ \hline %
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}

\vskip 2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab1
%\begin{table}[ht]
%{{\em Table~1}. \bf Running resistance and traction force for
%levitated flat freight car, (total weight load 500~kN, propulsion
%speed 200~km/h)}
%
%\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c|c|} \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm}\begin{center} {Running resistance components}\end{center} \end{minipage}&
%\begin{minipage}[c]{2.2cm}\begin{center} {Option 1}\\Halbach array\end{center} \end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{2.9cm}\begin{center} {Option 2}\\SC racetrack coils 1500$\times$500~mm\end{center} \end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.2cm}\begin{center} {Option 3}\\SC racetrack coils (Halbach equivalent)\end{center} \end{minipage}\\ \hline
% & \multicolumn{3}{|c|}{kN} \\ \hline
%Electrodynamic drag & 150 & 90 & 125 \\ \hline %
%Air dynamic drag & 10 & 10 &  10 \\ \hline %
%Grade resistance (70‰) & 37.5 & 37.5 & 37.5 \\ \hline %
%Grade resistance (10‰) & 5.36 & 5.36 & 5.36 \\ \hline %
%Acceleration (0.1~m/s$^2$) & 5 & 5 & 5 \\ \hline %
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm} Total traction force\\(grade 70‰) \end{minipage}
%  & 202.5 & 142.5 & 177.5 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm} Total traction force\\(grade 10‰) \end{minipage}
%  & 170.4 & 110.4 & 145.4 \\ \hline
%\end{tabular}
%\end{table}

For Option~1, to levitate a loaded flat car of 50 tons the
repulsive force of 500~kN/$\cos(60^\circ)=1000$~kN should be
applied. The lift-to-drag ratio at the speed of 200~km/h is near
6.7, therefore, the electrodynamic drag is determined as
1000~kN$/6.7=150$~kN. The normalized power per 1~kg is (150~kN
$\times$ 55.5~m/s)$/500$~kN = 16.6~W/N. For the Halbach array the
levitation efficiency and the normalized power are the functions
of speed and not affected by the air gap size. At any air gap the
maximal electrodynamic drag occurs at the speed of nearly $3$~m/s.
The levitation efficiency at this speed is evaluated as about
$1.3$, the normalized power required to overcome the
electromagnetic drag is 4.6~W/N. Then, the electromagnetic drag at
3~m/s is 1000~kN$/1.3 = 770$~kN.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab2
%
\vskip 2mm
\begin{center}
{\small
%
{\it Table 2.} {\bf Power predictions for levitated flat freight
car\\ (total load 500~kN, propulsion speed 200~km/h) }
%
}
%
\vskip 3mm
%
{\footnotesize
%
\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c|c|c|c|c|}\hline %
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{Power consumption} & %
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{\parbox[c][1cm][c]{2.5cm}{\centering Option 1\\  Halbach array} }& %
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{\parbox[c][1cm][c]{2.5cm}{\centering \vspace{-0.6mm} Option 2 SC\\ racetrack coils\\ $1500 \times 500$~mm} }& %
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{\parbox[c][1cm][c]{2.8cm}{\centering Option 3 SC\\ racetrack coils\\ (Halbach equivalent)} } \\ \hline %
& MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h) & MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h) & MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h) \\ \hline %
Electrodynamic drag & 8.333 & 0.833 & 5.0 & 0.5 & 6.944 & 0.694 \\ \hline %
Air dynamic drag & 0.556 & 0.056 & 0.556 & 0.056 & 0.556 & 0.056 \\ \hline %
Grade resistance (70‰) & 2.083 & 0.208 & 2.083 & 0.208 & 2.083 & 0.208 \\ \hline %
Grade resistance (10‰) & 0.298 & 0.03  & 0.298 & 0.03  & 0.298 & 0.03 \\ \hline %
Acceleration (0.1~m/s$^2$) & 0.278 & 0.028  & 0.278 & 0.028 & 0.278 & 0.028 \\ \hline %
\parbox[c][0.65cm][c]{2.9cm}{Total traction force\\ (grade 70‰) }& %
11.25 & 1.125 & 7.917 & 0.792 & 9.861 & 0.9861 \\ \hline %
\parbox[c][0.65cm][c]{2.9cm}{Total traction force\\ (grade 10‰) }& %
9.465 & 0.947 & 6.132 & 0.613 & 8.076 & 0.808 \\ \hline %
\end{tabular}
%
}
\end{center}
%
\vskip 1mm
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab2


%\begin{table}[h]
%{{\em Table~2.} \bf Power predictions for levitated flat freight
%car (total load 500~kN, propulsion speed 200~km/h)}
%
%\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c|c|c|c|c|} \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm}\begin{center} {Power consumption}\end{center} \end{minipage}&
%\multicolumn{2}{|c|}{\begin{minipage}[c]{2.2cm}\begin{center}
%{Option 1}\\Halbach array\end{center} \end{minipage}} &
%\multicolumn{2}{|c|}{\begin{minipage}[c]{2.9cm}\begin{center}
%{Option 2}\\SC racetrack coils 1500$\times$500~mm\end{center}
%\end{minipage}} &
%\multicolumn{2}{|c|}{\begin{minipage}[c]{3.2cm}\begin{center}
%{Option 3}\\SC racetrack coils (Halbach equivalent)\end{center}
%\end{minipage}}\\ \hline
% & MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h  & MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h)  & MW & kW/(t$\times$km/h)\\ \hline
%Electrodynamic drag & 8.333 & 0.833 & 5.0 & 0.5 & 6.944 & 0.694 \\
%\hline Air dynamic drag    & 0.556 & 0.056 & 0.556 & 0.056 & 0.556
%& 0.056 \\ \hline Grade resistance (70‰) & 2.083 & 0.208 & 2.083 &
%0.208 & 2.083 & 0.208 \\ \hline Grade resistance (10‰) & 0.298 &
%0.03  & 0.298 & 0.03  & 0.298 & 0.03 \\ \hline Acceleration
%(0.1~m/s$^2$) & 0.278 & 0.028  & 0.278 & 0.028 & 0.278 & 0.028 \\
%\hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm} Total traction force\\(grade 70‰) \end{minipage}
%  & 11.25 & 1.125 & 7.917 & 0.792 & 9.861 & 0.9861 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{4.0cm} Total traction force\\(grade 10‰) \end{minipage}
%  & 9.465 & 0.947 & 6.132 & 0.613 & 8.076 & 0.808 \\ \hline
%\end{tabular}
%\end{table}



Different numerical models are applied to analyse the null-flux
EDS with double-loop coils [3] and discrete tracks (see Figs 3,
4). One model utilizes the ideal coil appro-\linebreak ximation
with an infinitely thin conductor [2, 3]. Other models implement
the realistic coil configuration or describe CS coils via shorted
coils wounded with infinitely thin conductors. The simulated
parameters from the idealized model match well the results
obtained with the analytical model of infinitely thin conductors
[2,~3]. The idealized model gives a linear increase of the
levitation efficiency with speed evaluating it up to about 40 at
50~and 130~at~150~m/s. The normalized power is found to be as low
as nearly $1.2$~W/N re\-gard\-less the propulsion speed. The
models with realistic coil sizes demonstrate much poorer
levitation characteristics. As compared to the idealized coil, the
levitation efficiency is found to be 3 to 4 times less at the
speed of 50--150~m/s. Therefore, the power consumed to overcome
the electromagnetic drag increases proportionally. The use of a
double-loop multiturn coil results in uniformity of the current
distribution over the coil cross-section thus increasing the
levitation efficiency. For instance, for the double-loop SC EDS
concept the power required to compensate the electromagnetic drag
and propel a 50 ton vehicle with the speed of 50~m/s is about
2.8~MW. The calculated efficiency for different track
configurations [7--10] is presented in Table~3.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab3
%
\vskip 2mm
\begin{center}
{\small
%
{\it Table 3.} {\bf Comparative efficiency of EDS maglev with
different track concepts\\ (levitated weight 500~kN, propulsion
speed 200~km/h) }
%
}
%
\vskip 3mm
%
{\footnotesize
%
\begin{tabular}{|l|c|c|c|c|c|c|}\hline %
& %
\multicolumn{3}{c|}{Continuous$^1$ }& %
\multicolumn{3}{c|}{Discrete$^2$ } \\ \cline{2-7} %
\multicolumn{1}{|c|}{ \raisebox{5pt}[1pt]{Track concept} } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{1.13cm}{\centering Conduc-\par \vspace{-.5mm} ting\par \vspace{-.5mm} band\par } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{1.03cm}{\centering  Ruther-\par \vspace{-.5mm} ford-\par \vspace{-.5mm} type\par \vspace{-.5mm} cable\par } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{1.13cm}{\centering Conduc-\par \vspace{-.5mm} ting\par \vspace{-.5mm} band\par } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{0.85cm}{\centering  Infini-\par \vspace{-.5mm}tely\par \vspace{-.5mm}thin\par \vspace{-.5mm} loop\par } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{1.4cm}{\centering  Multiturn\par \vspace{-.5mm}coil with\par \vspace{-.5mm}finite\par \vspace{-.5mm}dimensions\par } & %
\parbox[c][1.2cm][c]{1.5cm}{\centering  Single-turn\par \vspace{-.5mm}coil with\par \vspace{-.5mm}finite\par \vspace{-.5mm}dimensions\par } \\ \hline %
\parbox[c][0.25cm][c]{3.5cm}{Levitation magnet type}  & PM & PM & SC & SC & SC & SC
\\ \hline %
\parbox[c][1.15cm][c]{3.5cm}{Power consumed by air\par \vspace{-.5mm}resistance, MW grade up\par \vspace{-.5mm}to 30‰, acceleration up to\par \vspace{-.5mm}0.1~m/s$^2$\par }  & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 \\ \hline
\parbox[c][0.55cm][c]{3.5cm}{Power consumed by\par \vspace{-.5mm} electrodynamic drag, MW\par }  & 8.3 & 2.6 & 5 & 0.6 & 2.8 & 4 \\ \hline
\parbox[c][0.25cm][c]{3.5cm}{Levitation efficiency}  & 3.4 & 20 & 5.6 & 46 & 10 & 7 \\ \hline
\parbox[c][0.25cm][c]{3.5cm}{Auxiliary power, kW}  & 0 & 0 & 50 & 50 & 50 & 50 \\ \hline
\parbox[c][0.2cm][c]{3.7cm}{Initial levitation speed, m/s}  & 3 & 3 & 15 & $\sim$30 & $\sim$25 & $\sim$25 \\ \hline
%
%
\end{tabular}
\flushleft \vskip-2mm\hskip7mm$^{1}$ Tracks and magnets are tilted
by 60$^\circ$ with respect to the horizontal plane (see Fig.~14)
to
provide lateral stability.%\par
%
\flushleft \vskip-2mm\hskip7mm$^{2}$ Tracks and magnets are tilted
by 90$^\circ$ with respect to the horizontal plane (see Fig.~3)
[2].%\par
\end{center}
%
%\vskip 2mm
%

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%tab3

%\begin{table}[h]
%{{\em Table~3}. \bf Comparative efficiency of EDS maglev with
%different track concepts (levitated weight 500~kN, propulsion
%speed 200~km/h)}
%
%\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|} \hline\small
% &
%\multicolumn{3}{|c|}{\begin{minipage}[c]{4.5cm}\begin{center}Continuous$^1$\end{center}
%\end{minipage}} &
%\multicolumn{3}{|c|}{\begin{minipage}[c]{4.5cm}\begin{center}Discrete$^2$\end{center}
%\end{minipage}} \\ \cline{2-7}
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}\begin{center}Track concept\end{center} \end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.6cm}\begin{center}Conducting\\band \end{center}\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.9cm}\begin{center}Rutherford-\\type cable\end{center}\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.6cm}\begin{center}Conducting\\band \end{center}\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.6cm}\begin{center}Infinitely\\thin loop \end{center}\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.8cm}\begin{center}Multiturn coil\\with finite\\dimensions \end{center}\end{minipage} &
%\begin{minipage}[c]{1.8cm}\begin{center}\small Single-turn coil\\with finite\\dimensions \end{center}\end{minipage} \\ \hline
%Levitation magnet type & PM & PM & SC & SC & SC & SC \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}Power consumed by air resistance, MW grade up to 30‰, acceleration up to 0.1~m/s$^2$\end{minipage}
% & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 & 1.7 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}Power consumed by electrodynamic drag, MW\end{minipage}
% & 8.3 & 2.6 & 5 & 0.6 & 2.8 & 4 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}Levitation efficiency\end{minipage}
% & 3.4 & 20 & 5.6 & 46 & 10 & 7 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}Auxiliary power, kW\end{minipage}
% & 0 & 0 & 50 & 50 & 50 & 50 \\ \hline
%\begin{minipage}[c]{3.5cm}Initial levitation speed, m/s\end{minipage}
% & 3 & 3 & 15 & $\sim$30 & $\sim$25 & $\sim$25 \\ \hline
%\end{tabular}
%
%{\footnotesize%
% \\%
%\hskip7mm
%$^{1}$ Tracks and magnets are tilted by 60$^\circ$ with
%respect to the horizontal plane (see Fig.~14) to provide lateral
%stability.
%
%\hskip7mm
%$^{2}$ Tracks and magnets are tilted by 90$^\circ$ with respect to
%the horizontal plane (see Fig.~3) [2]. }
%
%\end{table}

{\bf Conclusions.} Comparative calculations have revealed that
simplified models, particularly, those neglecting the real coil
configuration, underestimate the power consumption of EDS maglev
systems. At a low speed range up to 300--400~km/h, while the power
consumed by the electrodynamic drag remains higher than the one of
air dynamic drag, that EDS systems prove to be inefficient. A
promising solution to improve the maglev levitation
characteristics is the use of hybrid suspension systems such as
described in patents [28--31]. Such suspension utilizes different
types of magnets and is a combination of the EDS and EMS concepts.
This enables the best levitation efficiency both at low and high
speed ranges.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{02/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{02/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


{\footnotesize

%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
