%
{\footnotesize \noindent$\issueyear$\mbox{~~~~~~~~~~}
ВЕСТНИК\,САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГСКОГО\,УНИВЕРСИТЕТА
Т.\,14.\,\,Вып.\,$\issuenum$\linebreak %
\mbox{~~~~~~~~~~}ПРИКЛАДНАЯ МАТЕМАТИКА. ИНФОРМАТИКА. ПРОЦЕССЫ
УПРАВЛЕНИЯ %
}

%\ \\ \vskip 0.8mm\hrule \\ \hrule \\ \ \\

\vskip 0.5mm

\hline\vskip .5mm

\hline

\vspace{1.8cm} \noindent {\large ПРОЦЕССЫ УПРАВЛЕНИЯ}
\vspace{1.8cm}

\noindent{\small UDC 519.854\\ %  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 90C27, 90C29, 90C59

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Construction and reduction of the Pareto set\\
in asymmetric travelling salesman problem with two criteria$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it A. O. Zakharov$\,^1$%
, Yu. V. Kovalenko$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
}

\efootnote{
%%
\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ This work was supported by Russian Foundation
for Basic Research (project N 17-07-00371) and by the Ministry of
Science and Education of the Russian Federation (under the 5-100
Excellence Programme).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum10 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum10}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University,
7--9, Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
Novosibirsk State University, 1, Pirogova ul., Novosibirsk,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
630090, Russian Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:} Zakharov A. O., Kovalenko
Yu. V. Construction and reduction of the Pareto set in asymmetric
travelling salesman problem with two criteria. {\it Vestnik of
Saint~Petersburg University. Applied Mathematics. Computer
Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear, vol.~14, iss.~\issuenum,
pp.~\pageref{p10}--\pageref{p10e}.
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum10

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent We consider the bicriteria asymmetric
traveling salesman problem (bi-ATSP). The optimal solution to a
multicriteria problem is usually supposed to be the Pareto set,
which is rather wide in real-world problems. For the first time,
we apply to the bi-ATSP the axiomatic approach of the Pareto set
reduction proposed by V.~Noghin. We identify series of ``quanta of
information'' that guarantee the reduction of the Pareto set for
particular cases of the bi-ATSP. An approximation of the Pareto
set to the bi-ATSP is constructed by a new multi-objective genetic
algorithm. The experimental evaluation carried out in this paper
shows the degree of reduction of the Pareto set approximation for
various ``quanta of information'' and various
structures of the bi-ATSP instances generated randomly or from TSPLIB problems.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: reduction of the Pareto set, decision maker
preferences, multiobjective genetic algorithm, computational
experiment.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\textbf{1. Introduction.} The asymmetric travelling salesman
problem (ATSP) is one of the most popular problems in
combinatorial optimization~[1]. Given a complete directed graph,
where each arc is associated with a positive weight, we search for
a circuit visiting every vertex of the graph exactly once and
minimizing the total weight. In this paper we consider the
bicriteria ATSP (bi-ATSP), which is a special case of the
multicriteria ATSP~[2], where an arc is associated to a couple of
weights.

The best possible solution to a multicriteria optimization problem
(MOP) is usually supposed to be the Pareto set~[2, 3], which is
rather wide in real-world problems, and difficulties arise in
choosing the final variant. For that reason numerous methods
introduce some mechanism to treat the MOP: utility function, rule,
or binary relation, so that methods are aimed at finding an
``optimal'' solution with respect to this mechanism. However, some
approaches do not guarantee that the obtained solution will be
from the Pareto set. State-of-the-art methods are the
following~[4]: multiattribute utility theory, outranking
approaches, verbal decision analysis, various iterative procedures
with man-machine interface, etc. We investigate the axiomatic
approach of the Pareto set reduction proposed in monograph~[5],
which has an alternative idea. Here the author introduced an
additional information about the decision maker (DM) preferences
in terms of the so-called ``quantum of information''. The method
shows how to construct a new bound of the optimal choice, which is
narrower than the Pareto set. Practical applications of the
approach could be found in works~[6, 7].

As far as we know, the axiomatic approach of the Pareto set
reduction has not been widely investigated in the case of discrete
optimization problems, and an experimental evaluation has not been
carried out on real-world instances. Thus, we apply this approach
to the bi-ATSP in order to estimate its effectiveness, i.~e. the
degree of the Pareto set reduction and how it depends on the
parameters of the information about DM's preferences. We identify
series of ``quanta of information'' that guarantee the reduction
of the Pareto set  with particular structures. The bi-ATSP
instances with such structures are presented. %\looseness=-1

Originally the reduction is constructed with respect the Pareto
set of the considered problem. Due to the strongly NP-hardness of
the bi-ATSP we take an approximation of the Pareto set in
computational experiments. The ATSP cannot be approximated with
any constant or exponential approximation factor already with a
single objective function~[1]. Moreover, in~[8], the
non-approximability bounds were obtained for the multicriteria
ATSP with weights 1 and 2. The results are based on the
non-existence of a small size approximating set. Therefore,
metaheuristics, in particular multiobjective evolutionary
algorithms (MOEAs), are appropriate to approximate the Pareto set
of the bi-ATSP.

Numerous MOEAs have been proposed to MOPs (see~[9--14]). There are
three main classes of approaches to develop MOEAs, which are known
as Pareto-dominance based (see, e.\,g. SPEA2~[14],  NSGA-II~[9,
10], NSGA-III~[12]), decomposition based (see, e.\,g. MOEA/D~[11])
and indicator based approaches (see, e.\,g. SIBEA~[13]).
NSGA-II~[10] has one of the best results in the literature on
multiobjective genetic algorithms (MOGAs) for the MOPs with two or
three objectives. In article~[9] a fast implementation of a
steady-state version of NSGA-II is proposed for two dimensions.


In~[15, 16] NSGA-II was adopted to the multicriteria symmetric
travelling salesman problem, and the experimental evaluation was
performed on symmetric instances from TSPLIB library~[17]. As far
as we know, there is no an adaptation of NSGA-II to the problem,
where arc weights are non-symmetric. In this paper we develop a
MOGA based on NSGA-II to solve the bi-ATSP using adjacency-based
representation of solutions. The previous study was communicated
in~[18]. The MOGA from~[18] applies a problem-specific heuristic
to generate the initial population and uses a mutation operator,
which performs a random jump within 3-opt neighborhood. In
comparison to the MOGA from~[18] proposed two new crossover
operators, where the Pareto-dominance is involved. A computational
experiment is carried out on instances  generated randomly or from
ATSP-instances of TSPLIB library. The preliminary results of the
experiment indicate that our MOGA demonstrates competitive
results. The main experimental evaluation shows the degree
of\linebreak\newpage\noindent the reduction of the Pareto set
approximation for various structures of the ATSP instances in the
case of one and two ``quanta of information''. Note that early we
experimentally investigate the reduction of the Pareto set
approximation only in the case of one
``quantum of information'' in~[18]. %\looseness=-1




\textbf{2. Problem statement.} In the $m$-criteria travelling
salesman problem~[1] ($m$-TSP), we are given a complete weighted
graph $G = (V, E)$, with $V=\{v_1,\dots,v_n\}$ being the set of
vertices (nodes), and set $E$ contains arcs (or edges) between
every pair of vertices in $V$. A weight $d(e)$ assigns to each arc
(edge)~$e$ a vector~$(d_1(e),\dots,d_m(e))$ of length $m$, where
each element $d_j(e),\ j=1,\dots,m,$ corresponds to a certain
measure of arc (edge)~$e$ like travel distance, travel time,
expenses, the number of flight changes between corresponding
vertices (nodes). The aim is to find  ``minimal'' Hamiltonian
circuit(s) of the graph, i.~e. closed tour(s) visiting each of the
$n$ vertices of $G$ exactly once. Here ``minimal'' refers to the
notion of Pareto relation. If graph $G$ is undirected, we have
Symmetric $m$-TSP ($m$-STSP). If $G$ is a directed graph, then we
have Asymmetric $m$-TSP ($m$-ATSP).


The total weight of a tour $C$ is a vector
$D(C)=(D_1(C),\dots,D_m(C))$, where $D_j(C) =\sum_{e\in C}
d_j(e),\ j=1,\dots,m$. We say that one solution (tour) $C^\ast$
dominates another solution $C$ if the inequality $D(C^\ast) \leq
D(C)$ holds. The notation $D(C^\ast) \leq D(C)$ means that
$D(C^\ast) \neq D(C)$ and $D_i(C^\ast) \leqslant D_i(C)$ for all
$i \in I$, where $I = \{1, 2, \ldots, m \}$. This relation $\leq$
is also called {\it the Pareto relation}. We denote by
$\mathcal{C}$ all possible $(n-1)!$ tours of graph $G$. A set of
non-dominated solutions is called {\it  the set of Pareto-optimal
solutions}~[2, 3] $P_D(\mathcal{C})=\{ C \in \mathcal{C} \mid
\nexists C^\ast \in \mathcal{C}: D(C^\ast)~\leq~D(C)~\}.$ In
discrete problems, the set of Pareto-optimal solutions is
non-empty if the set of feasible solutions is non-empty, which is
true for the $m$-TSP. If we denote $\mathcal{D} = D(\mathcal{C})$,
then the Pareto set is defined as $P(\mathcal{D})=\{ y \in
\mathcal{D} \mid \nexists y^\ast \in \mathcal{D}:
y^\ast~\leq~y~\}.$ We assume that the Pareto set is specified
except for a collection of equivalence classes, generated by
equivalence relation $C' \sim C''$ iff $D(C') = D(C'')$.


In this paper we investigate the issue of the Pareto set reduction
for the bi-ATSP.



\textbf{3. Pareto set reduction.} Axiomatic approach of the Pareto
set reduction is applied to both discrete and continuous problems.
Due to consideration of the multicriteria ATSP we formulate the
basic concepts and results of the approach in terms of notations
introduced in section~2. Further, we investigate properties of the
bi-ATSP in the scope of the Pareto set reduction.



\textbf{\textit{3.1. Main approach.}} According to~[5] we consider
the extended multicriteria problem $<\mathcal{C}, D, \prec>$:
\begin{itemize}
\item a set of all possible $(n-1)!$ tours $\mathcal{C}$;
\item a vector criterion $D = (D_1, D_2, \ldots,  D_m)$ defined on set $\mathcal{C}$;
\item an asymmetric binary preference relation of the DM $\prec$ defined on set $\mathcal{D}$.
\end{itemize}
The notation $D(C') \prec D(C'')$ means that the DM prefers the
solution $C'$ to $C''$.

Binary relation $\prec$ satisfies some axioms of the so-called
``reasonable'' \ choice, according which it is irreflexive,
transitive, invariant with respect to a linear positive
transformation and compatible with each criteria $D_1, D_2,
\ldots, D_m$. The compatibility means that the DM is interested in
decreasing value of each criterion, when values of other criteria
are constant. Also, if for some feasible solutions $C', \ C'' \in
\mathcal{C}$ the relation $D(C') \prec D(C'')$ holds, then tour
$C''$ does not belong to the optimal choice within the whole set
$\mathcal{C}$.

Author~[5] established the Edgeworth---Pareto principle: under
axioms of ``reasonable'' choice any set of selected outcomes
$Ch(\mathcal{D})$ belongs to the Pareto set $P(\mathcal{D})$. Here
the set of selected outcomes is interpreted as some abstract set
corresponded to the set of tours, that satisfy all hypothetic
preferences of the DM. So, the optimal choice should be done
within the Pareto set only if preference relation $\prec$ fulfills
the axioms of ``reasonable'' choice.

In real-life multicriteria problems the Pareto set is rather wide.
For this reason V.~Noghin proposed a specific information on the
DM's preference relation $\prec$ to reduce the Pareto set staying
within the set of selected outcomes~[5, 19].

%\begin{defn}
%\label{ref_def_i_j}
{\bf Definition 1.} We say that there exists a {\it ``quantum of
information''} about the DM's preference relation $\prec$ if
vector $y' \in \mathbb R^m$ such that $y'_i = - w_i < 0$, $y'_j =
w_j > 0$, $y'_s = 0$ for all $s \in I\setminus \{i, j\}$ satisfies
the expression $y' \prec 0_m$. In such case we will say, that the
component of criteria $i$ is more important than the component~$j$
with given positive parameters~$w_i$,~$w_j$.
%\end{defn}

Thus, ``quantum of information'' shows, that the DM is ready to
compromise by increasing the criterion $D_j$ by amount $w_j$ for
decreasing the criterion $D_i$ by amount $w_i$. The quantity of
relative loss is set by the so-called {\it coefficient of relative
importance} $\theta = w_j / (w_i + w_j)$, therefore $\theta \in
(0, \ 1)$.

As mentioned before the relation $\prec$ is invariant with respect
to a linear positive trans-\linebreak formation. Hence
Definition~1 is equivalent to the existence of such vector $y''
\in \mathbb R^m$ with components $y''_i = \theta - 1$, $y''_j =
\theta$, $y''_s = 0$ for all $s \in
I$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{i, j\}$, that the relation $y''
\prec 0_m$ holds. Further, in experimental study (subsection~5.2)
we consider ``quantum of information'' exactly in terms of
coefficient $\theta$.

In~[5] the author established the rule of taking into account
``quantum of information''. This rule consists in constructing a
``new'' vector criterion using the components of the ``old'' one
and parameters of the information $w_i$, $w_j$. Then one should
find the Pareto set of ``new'' multicriteria problem with the same
set of feasible solutions and ``new'' vector criterion. The
obtained set will belong to the Pareto set of the initial problem
and give a narrower upper bound on the optimal choice as a result
the Pareto set will be reduced.

The following theorem states the rule of applying ``quantum of
information'' and specifies how to evaluate ``new'' vector
criterion upon the ``old'' one.

%\begin{thm}[see {[5]}]
%\label{th_red_1}

{\bf Theorem 1} (see [5]){\bf.} {\it Given a ``quantum of
information'' by Definition~1, the inclusions $Ch(\mathcal{D})
\subseteq \hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) \subseteq P(\mathcal{D})$ are valid
for any set of selected outcomes $Ch(\mathcal{D})$. Here
$\hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) = D(P_{\hat{D}}(\mathcal{C}))$ and
$P_{\hat{D}}(\mathcal{C})$ is the set of Pareto-optimal solutions
with respect to $m$-dimensional vector criterion $\hat{D} =
(\hat{D}_1, \ldots, \hat{D}_m)$, where $\hat{D}_j = w_j D_i + w_i
D_j$, $\hat{D}_s = D_s$ for all $s \neq j$.}
%\end{thm}

%\begin{cor}[see {[5]}]
%\label{cl_red}
{\bf Corollary 1} (see [5]){\bf.} {\it The result of Theorem~1
holds as well as component $j$ of ``new'' vector criterion is
evaluated by formula $\hat{D}_j = \theta D_i + (1-\theta) D_j$.}
%\end{cor}

Thus ``new'' vector criterion $\hat{D}$ differs from the ``old''
one only by less important component $j$. In~[20--22] one can find
results on applying particular collections of ``quanta of
information'' and scheme to arbitrary collection.

Suppose we consider two ``quanta of information'' simultaneously:
the $i$th criterion $D_i$ is more important than the $j$th
criterion $D_j$ with coefficient of relative importance
$\theta_{ij}$, and the $j$th criterion $D_j$ is more important
than the $i$th criterion $D_i$ with coefficient of relative
importance $\theta_{ji}$. Such conflicting situation occurs only
if the inequality $\theta_{ij} + \theta_{ji} < 1$ holds (see the
explanation in~[5]). The latter guarantees the existence of two
vectors $y^{(1)}, y^{(2)} \in \mathbb R^m$:
\begin{equation}
\label{quanta_i_j}
\begin{split}
y^{(1)}_i = \theta_{ij} - 1, \ y^{(1)}_j  & = \theta_{ij}, \ y^{(1)}_s = 0, \\
y^{(2)}_i = \theta_{ji},  \ y^{(2)}_j = \theta_{ji} - 1, & \
y^{(2)}_s = 0 \quad \forall s \in I$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{i,
j\},
\end{split}
\end{equation}
such that the relations $y^{(1)} \prec 0_m$, $y^{(2)} \prec 0_m$
are valid~[5].

The following theorem shows how to apply two ``quanta of
information''.

%\begin{thm}[see {[5]}]
%\label{th_red_2}

{\bf Theorem 2} (see [5]){\bf.} {\it Given two ``quanta of
information'':  the $i$th criterion $D_i$ is more important than
the $j$th criterion $D_j$ with coefficient of relative importance
$\theta_{ij}$, and the $j$th criterion $D_j$ is more important
than the $i$th criterion $D_i$ with coefficient of
relative\linebreak\newpage\noindent importance $\theta_{ji}$. The
inequality $\theta_{ij} + \theta_{ji} < 1$ is valid. Then the
inclusions $Ch(\mathcal{D}) \subseteq \hat{P}(\mathcal{D})
\subseteq P(\mathcal{D})$ hold for any set of selected outcomes
$Ch(\mathcal{D})$. Here $\hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) =
D(P_{\hat{D}}(\mathcal{C}))$, and $P_{\hat{D}}(\mathcal{C})$ is
the set of Pareto-optimal solutions with respect to
$m$-dimensional vector criterion $\hat{D} = (\hat{D}_1, \ldots,
\hat{D}_m)$, where $\hat{D}_i = (1-\theta_{ji}) D_i + \theta_{ji}
D_j$, $\hat{D}_j = \theta_{ij} D_i + (1-\theta_{ij}) D_j$,
$\hat{D}_s = D_s$ for all $s \neq i,
j$.}% \looseness=-1
%\end{thm}



\textbf{\textit{3.2. Pareto set reduction in bi-ATSP.}} Here we
consider the bi-ATSP and its properties with respect to reduction
of the Pareto set.

Obviously, the upper bound on the cardinality of the Pareto set
$P(\mathcal{D})$ is $(n-1)!$, and this bound is tight~[23].
Authors~[24] established the maximum number of elements in the
Pareto set for any multicriteria discrete problem, that in the
case of the bi-ATSP gives the following upper bound:
$|P(\mathcal{\mathcal{D}})| \leqslant \min\{l_1, l_2\}$, where
$l_i$ is the number of different values in the set $\mathcal{D}_i
= D_i(\mathcal{C})$, $i = 1, 2$. In the case of the bi-ATSP with
integer weights we get $l_i \leqslant \max\{\mathcal{D}_i\} -
\min\{\mathcal{D}_i\} + 1$, where values $\max\{\mathcal{D}_i\}$
and $\min\{\mathcal{D}_i\}$ can be replaced
by upper and lower bounds on the objective function ${D}_i$, $i = 1, 2$. %, respectively.

Now, we go to establish theoretical results estimating the degree
of the Pareto set reduction. Let us consider the case, when all
elements of the Pareto set lay on principal diagonal of some
rectangle in the criterion space.

%\begin{thm}
%\label{prop1_crit_theta}

{\bf Theorem 3.} {\it Let $P(\mathcal{D}) = \{ (y_1, y_2): y_2 = a
- k y_1, y_1 \in \mathcal{D}_1, y_2 \in \mathcal{D}_2 \}$, where
$a$ and $k$ are arbitrary positive constants. Suppose the 1st
criterion $D_1$ is more important than the 2nd one $D_2$ with
coefficient of relative importance~$\theta'$. If $\theta'
\geqslant k/(k+1)$, then the reduction of the Pareto set
$\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})$ consists of only one element. In the case
of $\theta' < k/(k+1)$ the reduction does not hold, i.~e.
$\hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) = P(\mathcal{D})$.}
%\end{thm}
%\begin{proof}

{\bf Proof.} The proof is based on geometrical representation of
the Pareto set reduction using cone dominance.

Following~[5] the domination of some vector $\hat{y} \in \mathbb
R^2$ over another vector $\tilde{y} \in \mathbb R^2$ by the Pareto
relation $\leq$, i.~e. $\hat{y} \leq \tilde{y}$, means that their
difference $\hat{y} - \tilde{y}$ belongs to convex cone $\mathbb
R_{-}^2 = \mbox{cone}\{-e^1, -e^2
\}$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{0_2\}$ (the non-positive orthant),
where $e^1$ and $e^2$ are unit vectors of space $\mathbb R^2$. In
other words, vector $\hat{y}$ dominates vector $\tilde{y}$ by cone
$\mathbb R_{-}^2$. Thus, the Pareto set is actually the set of
non-dominated vectors with respect to non-positive orthant.

A ``quantum of information'' 1st criterion $D_1$ is more important
than the 2nd one $D_2$ in terms of coefficient $\theta'$ is
defined by vector $y'$ with components $y'_1 = \theta' - 1$, $y'_2
= \theta'$. Such vector $y'$ extends the non-positive orthant to
convex cone $M = \mbox{cone}\{ -e^1, -e^2,  y'
\}$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{0_2\}$, and set
$\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})$ from Theorem~1 is the set of non-dominated
vectors with respect to cone~$M$.


Vector $(-1, \ k)^T$ gives the direction to line $y_2 = a - k y_1$
in the criterion space. If vector $(-1, \ k)^T$ belongs to a
convex cone without $\{0_2\}$, generated by vectors $-e^1$,
$-e^2$, and $y'$, then all vectors except one of the Pareto set
$P(\mathcal{D})$ will be dominated with respect to that cone. It
is easy to check that the inclusion $(-1, \ k)^T \in
\mbox{cone}\{-e^1, -e^2, y'\}$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{0_2\}$
is valid iff $\theta' \geqslant k/(k+1)$.
%\end{proof}

%\begin{thm}
%\label{prop2_crit_theta}

{\bf Theorem 4.} {\it Let in Theorem~3, otherwise, the 2nd
criterion $D_2$ is more important than the 1st one $D_1$ with
coefficient of relative importance $\theta''$. Then the reduction
of the Pareto set $\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})$ has only one element if
$\theta'' \geqslant 1/(k+1)$, and $\hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) =
P(\mathcal{D})$, if $\theta'' < 1/(k+1)$.}
%\end{thm}

The proof of Theorem~4 is analogous to the proof of Theorem~3.

Particularly, if the feasible set $\mathcal{D}$ lay on the line
$y_2 = a - k y_1$, we have $P(\mathcal{D}) = \mathcal{D}$, and the
conditions of Theorems~3 and~4 hold. In such case we say, that
{\it criteria $D_1$ and $D_2$ contradict each other with
coefficient~$k$}.

Obviously, for any bi-ATSP instance there exists the minimum
number of parallel lines with a negative slope, that all elements
of the Pareto set belong to them. Thus we have

%\begin{cor}
%\label{cl_crit_theta}
{\bf Corollary 2.} {\it Let $P(\mathcal{D}) = \bigcup_{i=1}^p \{
(y_1, y_2): y_2 = a_i - k y_1, y_1 \in \mathcal{D}_1, y_2 \in
\mathcal{D}_2 \}$, where $a_i$, $i = 1, \ldots, p$, and $k$ are
arbitrary positive constants. And criterion $D_1$ is more
important than criterion $D_2$ with coefficient of relative
importance~$\theta'$ and $\theta' \geqslant k/(k+1)$, or criterion
$D_2$ is more important than criterion $D_1$ with coefficient of
relative importance~$\theta''$ and $\theta'' \geqslant 1/(k+1)$,
then $|\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})| \leqslant p$.}
%\end{cor}


%\begin{thm}
%\label{thm3_crit_theta}

{\bf Theorem 5.} {\it Let $P(\mathcal{D}) = \{ (y_1, y_2): y_2 = a
- k y_1, y_1 \in \mathcal{D}_1, y_2 \in \mathcal{D}_2 \}$, where
$a$ and $k$ are arbitrary positive constants. Suppose the 1st
criterion $D_1$ is more important than the 2nd one $D_2$ with
coefficient of relative importance~$\theta'$, and the 2nd
criterion $D_2$ is more important than the 1st one $D_1$ with
coefficient of relative importance $\theta''$. If at least one
inequality $\theta' \geqslant k/(k+1)$ or $\theta'' \geqslant
1/(k+1)$ is valid, then the reduction of the Pareto set
$\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})$ consists of only one element. If both
inequalities $\theta' < k/(k+1)$ and $\theta'' < 1/(k+1)$ hold,
then the reduction does not occur, i.~e. $\hat{P}(\mathcal{D}) =
P(\mathcal{D})$.}
%\end{thm}

The proof of Theorem~5 is analogous to the proof of Theorem~3.
Here two ``quanta of information'' are defined by two vectors
$y^{(1)}$, $y^{(2)}$ with components~(\ref{quanta_i_j}), where $m
= 2$, $i = 1$, and $j = 2$, that extend the non-positive orthant
to convex cone $M = \mbox{cone}\{ -e^1, -e^2,  y^{(1)}, y^{(2)}
\}$\,{\Large{$\setminus$}}\,$\{0_2\}$.

Now we consider the bi-ATSP(1,2), where each arc $e \in E$ has a
weight $d(e)= (d_1(e), d_2(e)) \in \{1, \ 2\}^2$ such that $d_2(e)
= 3 - d_1(e)$. Angel e. a.~[8] proved that for any $r \geqslant 1$
and any $k \geqslant 5$ there exist such instances of the
bi-ATSP(1,2) with $n = k r$ vertices that the Pareto set contains
at least $r+1$ elements of the form $(2kr, kr)$, $(2kr-n, kr+k)$,
$(2kr-2k, kr+2k)$, $\ldots$, $(kr, 2kr)$.
Thus, criteria $D_1$ and $D_2$ contradict each other with coefficient $1$. % in these instances.
According to Theorems~3~and~4 in this class of the bi-ATSP we
could exclude at least $r$ elements from the Pareto set, when
using ``quantum of information'' the 1st~criterion $D_1$ is more
important than the 2nd~criterion $D_2$, or vice versa, with
coefficient $\theta = 0.5$.

Emelichev and Perepeliza~[23] constructed bi-ATSP instances with
integer weights, where criteria contradict each other with
coefficient 1 and $|P(\mathcal{D})| = (n-1)!$. So, for these
instances $|\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})| = 1$ if the 1st criterion $D_1$
is more important than the 2nd criterion $D_2$, or vice versa,
with coefficient $\theta = 0.5$.

Further, we identify the condition that guarantees excluding at
least one element from the Pareto set. Suppose that a ``quantum of
information'' is given: the 1st component of criteria $D_1$ is
more important than the 2nd one $D_2$ with coefficient of relative
importance $\theta$. We suppose, that there exist such tours $C',
C'' \in P_D(\mathcal{C})$ satisfying the following inequality:
\begin{equation}
\label{prop_2} \left(D_1(C') - D_1(C'')\right) / \left(D_2(C'') -
D_2(C')\right) \geqslant \left(1 - \theta\right) / \theta,
\end{equation}
then at least one element will be excluded from the Pareto set
$P(\mathcal{D})$ after using a ``quantum of information''. So,
$|P(\mathcal{D})| - |\hat{P}(\mathcal{D})| \geqslant 1$. Analogous
result could be obtained, when the 2nd criterion is more important
than the 1st one. The difficulty in checking
inequality~(\ref{prop_2}) is that we should know two elements of
the Pareto set. Meanwhile the tours $C_{\rm min1} =
\mbox{argmin}\{D_1(C), \ C \in \mathcal{C}\}$, $C_{\rm min2} =
\mbox{argmin}\{D_2(C), \ C \in \mathcal{C}\}$ are Pareto-optimal
by definition.

The results of this subsection are true for any discrete
bi-criteria problem.



\textbf{4. Multiobjective genetic algorithm.} The genetic
algorithm is a random search method that models a process of
evolution of a population of {\em individuals}~[25]. Each
individual is a sample solution to the optimization problem being
solved. Individuals of a new population are built by means of
reproduction operators (crossover and/or mutation).



\textbf{\textit{4.1. NSGA-II scheme.}} To construct an
approximation of the Pareto set to the bi-ATSP we develop a MOGA
based on Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II
(NSGA-II)~[10]. The NSGA-II is initiated by generating $N$ random
solutions of the initial population. Next the population is sorted
based on the non-domination relation (the Pareto relation). Each
solution $C$ of the population is assigned a {\em rank} equal to
its {\em non-domination level} (1 is the best level, 2 is the next
best level, and so on). The first level consists of all
non-dominated solutions of the population. Individuals of the next
level are the non-dominated solutions of the population, where
solutions of the first level are discounted, and so on. Ranks of
solutions are calculated in $O(mN^2)$ time by means of the
algorithm proposed in~[10]. We try to minimize rank of individuals
in evolutionary process. To get an estimate of the density of
solutions surrounding a solution $C$ in a non-dominated level of
the population, two nearest solutions on each side of this
solution are identified for each of the objectives. The estimation
of solution $C$ is called {\em crowding distance} and it is
computed as a normalized perimeter of the cuboid formed in the
criterion space by the nearest neighbors. The crowding distances
of individuals in all non-dominated levels are computed in
$O(mN\mathrm{log}N)$ time (see, e. g.~[10]).


The NSGA-II is characterized by the population management strategy
known as generational model~[25]. At each iteration of NSGA-II we
select $N$ pairs of parent solutions from the current
population~$P_{t-1}$. Then we mutate parents, and create
offspring, applying a crossover (recombination) to each pair of
parents. Offspring compose population $Q_{t-1}$.

The next population $P_{t}$ is constructed from the best $N$
solutions of the current population~$P_{t-1}$ and
the offspring population $Q_{t-1}$. %created from $P_{t-1}$ by applying selection, crossover, and mutation
Population $Q_{t-1}\cup P_{t-1}$ is sorted based on the
non-domination relation, and the crowding distances of individuals
are calculated. The best $N$ solutions are selected using the rank
and the crowding distance. Between two solutions with differing
non-domination ranks, we prefer the solution with the lower rank.
If both solutions belong to the same level, then we prefer the
solution with the bigger crowding distance. %\looseness=-1

One iteration of the presented NSGA-II is performed in $O(mN^2)$
time as shown in~[10]. In our implementation of the NSGA-II four
individuals of the initial population are constructed by a
problem-specific heuristic presented in~[26] for the ATSP with one
criterion. The heuristic first solves the Assignment Problem, and
then patches the circuits of the optimum assignment together to
form a feasible tour in two ways. So, we create two solutions with
each of the objectives. All other individuals of the initial
population are generated randomly.

Each parent  is chosen by $s$-{\em tournament %on Step~2.1.1
selection}: sample randomly $s$~individuals from the current
population and select the best one by means of the rank and the
crowding distance. %\looseness=-1



\textbf{\textit{4.2. Recombination and mutation operators.}} The
experimental results of~pa\-pers~[26,~27] for the $m$-TSP indicate
that reproduction operators with the adjacency-ba\-sed
representation of solutions have an advantage over operators,
which emphasize the order or position of the vertices in parent
solutions. We suppose that a feasible solution to the~bi-ATSP  is
encoded as a list of arcs.

In the recombination operator we use one of new crossovers
$\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ or
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ proposed here. The operator
$\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ (Directed Edge Crossover
with Pareto Relation) may be considered as a  ``direct
descendant'' of the well-known EX operator (Edge Crossover), and
the operator $\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ (Distance
Preserving Crossover with Pareto Relation) is a  ``direct
descendant'' of the well-known DPX operator (Distance Preserving
Crossover). EX and DPX were originally developed for the 1-STSP
with single-objective~[27].

Both operators $\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ and
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ are {\em respectful}~[28],
i.~e. all arcs shared by both parents are copied into the
offspring. Moreover, we try to construct an offspring of good
quality, taking into account the Pareto relation. To this end, the
tour fragments are reconnected using a modification of the nearest
neighborhood heuristic, where at each step we choose a
non-dominated feasible arc. The Pareto relation on the set of arcs
is defined similar to the Pareto relation on  the set of
solutions. Feasible arcs in $\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$
are the ones, that are contained in at least one of the parents.
However, in $\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ the feasible
set consists of the arcs, that are absent in parents. Note that
new arcs are inserted taking into account the non-violation of
sub-tour elimination constraints.

$\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ operator is exploitive, but
it can never generate new arcs (transmitting requirement~[28]).
So, we use mutation operators to introduce new arcs and therefore
diversity into the MOGA  populations. By contrast,
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ operator is explorative
because it not only inherits common arcs from parents, but also
introduces new arcs.

If the offspring obtained by $\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize
PR}}$ or $\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ is equal to one of
the parents, then the result of the recombination is calculated by
applying the well-known {\em shift mutation}~[28] to one of the
two parents with equal probability. This approach allows us to
avoid creating a clone of parents and to maintain a diverse set of
solutions in the population. %\looseness=-1

The mutation is also applied to each parent  with probability
$p_{\mbox{\footnotesize mut}}$, which is a tunable parameter of
the MOGA. We use a mutation operator proposed in~[26] for the
one-criteria ATSP. It performs a random jump within 3-opt
neighborhood, trying to improve a parent solution in terms of one
of the criteria. Each time one of two objectives is used in
mutation with equal probability. %\looseness=-1



\textbf{5. Computational experiment.} This section presents the
results of the compu-\linebreak tational experiment on the bi-ATSP
instances.
Our MOGA was programmed in C++ and tested on a %(NSGA-II-biATSP)
computer with Intel~Core~i5~3470 3.20~GHz processor, 4 Gb~RAM. We
set  the tournament size~${s=10}$ and the mutation
probability~${p_{\mbox{\footnotesize mut}}=0.1}$. We use the
notation NSGA-II-DPX (NSGA-II-DEC) for the MOGA employing the
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$
($\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$) crossover.


Various meta-heuristics and heuristics have been developed for the
$m$-STSP, such as Pareto local search algorithms, MOEAs,
multiobjective ant colony optimization methods, memetic algorithms
and others (see, e. g.~[15, 16, 29--31]). However, we have not
found in the literature any multiobjective metaheuristic proposed
specifically to the  $m$-ATSP and experimentally tested on
instances with non-symmetric weights of arcs. In~[18], we proposed
new MOGA based on NSGA-II to solve the bi-ATSP, but no a crossover
taking into account bi-criteria nature of the problem was used,
and a detailed experimental evaluation of the MOGA was not
performed in~[18]. Note that the performance of MOGAs depends
significantly upon the choice of the crossover operator.

So, the computational experiment consists of two stages.
At the first stage estimated the performance of NSGA-II-DPX and NSGA-II-DEC on instances of small sizes, %NSGA-II-biATSP
for which the Pareto sets are found by an exact algorithm. At the
second stage the degree of reduction of the Pareto set
approximation is evaluated.

We note that there exists MOOLIBRARY library~[32], which contains
test instances of some discrete multicriteria problems. However,
the $m$-TSP is not presented in this library, so we generate the
bi-ATSP test instances randomly and construct them from the ATSP
instances of TSPLIB library~[17], as well. %\looseness=-1


\textbf{\textit{5.1. Pareto set approximation.}} NSGA-II-DPX and
NSGA-II-DEC were tested using small-size problem instances of four
series with $n=12$: S12[1,10][1,10], S12[1,20][1,20],
S12[1,10][1,20], S12contr[1,2][1,2]. Each series consists of five
problems with integer weights $d_1(\cdot)$ and $d_2(\cdot)$ of
arcs randomly generated from intervals specified at the ending of
the series name. In series S12contr[1,2][1,2] the criteria
contradict each other with coefficient~$1$, i.~e. weights are
generated so that $d_2(e)=3-d_1(e)$ for all $e\in E$. The Pareto
sets to the considered bi-ATSP~instances were found by complete
enumeration of $(n-1)!$ possible Hamiltonian circuits. The
population size $N$  was set to $50$ on the basis of the
preliminary experiments. Our MOGAs were run $30$ times for each
instance and each run continued for $1000$ iterations.
%\looseness=-1

Let $P^*:=P(\mathcal{D})$ be the Pareto set, and $A$ be its
approximation obtained by NSGA-II-DPX or NSGA-II-DEC. In order to
evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms and compare
them, the generational distance (GD)~[12] and the inverted
generational distance (IGD)~[12] are involved as performance
metrics:
$$
\mbox{GD}(A,P^*)=\frac{1}{|A|}\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{|A|}\mu_i^2},~ \ \
\mbox{IGD}(A,P^*)=\frac{1}{|P^*|}\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^{|P^*|}\tilde{\mu}_i^2},
$$
where $\mu_i$ ($\tilde{\mu}_i$) is the Euclidean distance between
the $i$-th member (two-dimensio\-nal point) in the set $A$ ($P^*$)
and its nearest member in the set $P^*$ ($A$). GD can only reflect
the convergence of an algorithm, while IGD could measure both
convergence and diversity. Smaller value of the metrics means
better quality.

The results of experiment are presented in Table~1. Here index In
corresponds to the values at the initial population and index Fin
corresponds to the values at the final population in average over
$30$ runs. $N^{P^*}$
represents the number of elements in the Pareto set. %\looseness=-1

\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}

\small

{\it Table 1.} {\bf Approximation of the Pareto set for series}%}%~  ($30$ runs, $1000$ iterations)}
%\label{tab:Ser1_10}

\vskip 3mm

\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline
\multirow{2}{*}{Inst} & \multicolumn{4}{c|}{NSGA-II-DPX}&\multicolumn{4}{c|}{NSGA-II-DEC} & \multirow{2}{*}{$N^{P^*}$}\\
\cline{2-9} & $\mbox{GD}_{\mbox{\tiny In}}$ &
$\mbox{IGD}_{\mbox{\tiny In}}$ & $\mbox{GD}_{\mbox{\tiny Fin}}$ &
$\mbox{IGD}_{\mbox{\tiny Fin}}$ & $\mbox{GD}_{\mbox{\tiny In}}$ &
$\mbox{IGD}_{\mbox{\tiny In}}$& $\mbox{GD}_{\mbox{\tiny Fin}}$ & $\mbox{IGD}_{\mbox{\tiny Fin}}$ & \\
\hline
\multicolumn{10}{|c|}{{\it Series} S12[1,10][1,10]}\\
\hline
1 &  8.109 & 4.89   & 1.214 & 1.205  & 7.515 &  4.686  & {\bf 1.003} &  {\bf 1.045} & 13 \\
\hline
2 &  4.188 & 4.481  & 1.693 & 1.3  &   3.944 &  4.543  & {\bf 1.17}  &  {\bf 0.929} & 10 \\
\hline
3 &  2.614 & 4.224  & 1.519 & 1.489  &  3.791 &  4.243  & {\bf 1.24}  &  {\bf  1.224}& 10\\
\hline
4 &  8.511 & 5.289 & 1.724 &  1.375  & 8.114 &  5.115  & {\bf 1.426} &  {\bf 1.001} & 16 \\
\hline
5 &  7.405 & 3.768    & 1.263 &  1.093   & 7.864 & 3.911  &  1.171 &  1.092& 18\\
\hline
Aver &   6.165 & 4.53 & 1.483 & 1.293 & 6.245 &  4.499 &  1.202 & 1.058 & 13.4 \\
\hline
\multicolumn{10}{|c|}{{\it Series} S12[1,20][1,20]}\\
\hline
1 &   17.843 & 7.82 &   1.685 &  1.511 & 16.42  & 7.45  &    {\bf 1.404} & {\bf 1.337} &  22 \\
\hline
2 &  16.049 & 7.857 &  3.063 &  2.246 & 15.619 & 7.64  &    {\bf 1.987} & {\bf 1.524} &  26 \\
\hline
3 &  15.483 & 7.114 &  2.86 &   2.452 &  15.888 & 7.272 &    {\bf 1.973} & {\bf 1.832} & 24 \\
\hline
4 &  16.531 & 7.39 &    2.296 &  1.676 &  16.129 & 7.165 &    {\bf 1.259} & {\bf 1.072} &  27\\
\hline
5 &  14.468 & 7.152 &  2.643 &  2.484 & 15.294 & 7.485 &    {\bf 1.855} & {\bf 1.824} &  23 \\
\hline
Aver &   16.075  &   7.467  &   2.509 & 2.074  &  15.87 &   7.402 & 1.696 & 1.518   & 24.4 \\
\hline
\multicolumn{10}{|c|}{{\it Series} S12[1,10][1,20]}\\
\hline
1 &  10.732 & 8.427  & 2.835 & 2.2   & 10.76 &  8.343 & {\bf 2.488} & {\bf 1.882} & 11 \\
\hline
2 &  1.994 &  4.802  & 1.686 & 1.478  & 1.143 &  4.935 & {\bf 0.63} &  {\bf 0.915} & 14 \\
\hline
3 &  0     &   4.17  & 1.405 & 1.729  & 0     &  4.17  & {\bf 0.441} & {\bf 1.659} & 6  \\
\hline
4 &  10.621 & 6.17   & 1.965 & 1.714  & 10.508 & 6.2   & {\bf 1.075} & {\bf 1.092} & 21 \\
\hline
5 &  9.444 &  6.034  & 2.455 &  1.942 & 9.448  & 6.098 & {\bf 1.814} & {\bf 1.428} & 17 \\
\hline
Aver &   6.558    & 3.787 & 2.069  & 1.813  &  6.372 & 5.949 & 1.289 & 1.395 & 13.8 \\
\hline
\multicolumn{10}{|c|}{{\it Series} S12contr[1,2][1,2]}\\
\hline
1  &  0  &  0.201 &    0 &  0 & 0 & 0.202 &  0 &  0 & 13 \\
\hline
2  &  0  &  0.199 &    0 &  0 & 0 & 0.199 & 0 &  0 & 13 \\
\hline
3  &  0  & 0.202 &     0 &  0 & 0 & 0.208 & 0 &  0 & 13 \\
\hline
4  &  0  & 0.249 &     0 &  0 & 0 & 0.221 & 0 &  0 & 13 \\
\hline
5  &  0  &  0.217 &    0 &  0 & 0 & 0.201 & 0 & 0  & 13\\
\hline
Aver  &  0 &  0.213 & 0 &  0 & 0 &  0.206 & 0 &  0 & 13\\
\hline
\end{tabular}
%\\
{\flushleft \hskip7mm N\,o\,t\,e.\,\,The average final result that
is significantly better than the other is marked in bold\\
(according the Wilcoxon signed-rank test).

}
\end{center} \vspace{-4mm}
\end{table}




As seen from Table~1, on all series except for S12contr[1,2][1,2],
for NSGA-II-DPX the distance GD decreases in approximately $5$
times  and the distance IGD --- in approximately $3.5$ times on
average from the initial population to the final one. At the same
time, for NSGA-II-DEC the average distance GD decreases in
approximately $6.5$ times  and the average distance IGD -- in
approximately $4.5$ times. Moreover, the average number of
elements in the Pareto set approximation increases approximately
$3$ times during $1000$~ite\-ra\-tions for both algorithms. The
values of performance metrics  at the final population show the
convergence of the approximation obtained by NSGA-II-DEC or
NSGA-II-DPX to the Pareto set. The average CPU time of one trial
for both MOGAs  is approximately 2 minutes on all instances.

In  instances of series~S12contr[1,2][1,2] any feasible solution
is Pareto-optimal. So, the main purpose of the MOGA is to obtain
all elements of the Pareto set, and the Pareto dominance is not
important. Both considered MOGAs find the Pareto set on all trials
and on all instances in less than $100$ iterations.

The statistical analysis of experimental data was carried out
using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test~[12] at a $5\%$ significance
level. We test for each instance the difference between values of
metric $\mbox{GD}_{\mbox{\footnotesize Fin}}$ (or
$\mbox{IGD}_{\mbox{\footnotesize Fin}}$) for algorithms
NSGA-II-DEC and NSGA-II-DPX over $30$ trials. The average final
result for a metric that is significantly better than the other is
marked in bold in Table~1. In 15 out of 20 considered instances,
NSGA-II-DEC outperforms NSGA-II-DPX (in 14 of 15 cases the
differences between values of metrics are statistically
significant). So, we can conclude that our MOGAs demonstrate
competitive results, but $\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$
crossover has an advantage over $\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize
PR}}$ crossover. Therefore, in subsection 5.2 we use only
NSGA-II-DEC to find an approximation of the Pareto set. Further
research may include construction of a MOGA, where crossovers
$\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ and
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ complement each other and
are used together in some way. In particular,
$\mbox{DPX}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ can be used to find
improvements when $\mbox{DEC}_{\mbox{\footnotesize PR}}$ fails.

We note that the points of the Pareto set and its approximations
obtained by MOGAs are appeared to be ``almost uniformly''
distributed along principal diagonal of a rectangle in all test
problems (see, e. g. one result of our MOGA for series
S12[1,10][1,20] on Figure).

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig1

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=0.85]{10/fig1}

\vskip 1mm {\small{\it Figure.} Approximation of the Pareto set on
one instance of series S12[1,10][1,20]\\ ($\mbox{GD}=0.249$,
$\mbox{IGD}=0.566$) } }
\end{figure}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%fig1

%\begin{figure}[!h] \centering
%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[height=4.2cm]{ApproxPS.eps}
%\caption{Approximation of the Pareto set on one instance of series
%S12[1,10][1,20] \\ ($\mbox{GD}=0.249$, $\mbox{IGD}=0.566$)}
%\label{fig:ApproxPS}
%\end{center}
%\end{figure}


\textbf{\textit{5.2. Pareto set reduction.}} The reduction of the
Pareto set approximation was tested on the following series with
{$n=50$}: S50[1,10][1,10], S50[1,20][1,20], S50[1,10][1,20],
S50contr[1,2][1,2]. The series are constructed randomly in the
same way as series with {$n=12$} from subsection~5.1. Each series
consists of five instances. We also took seven ATSP instances of
series ftv from TSPLIB library~[17]: ftv33, ftv35, ftv38, ftv44,
ftv47, ftv55, ftv64. The ftv collection includes instances from
vehicle routing applications. These instances compose series
denoted by SftvRand, and their arc weights are used for the first
criterion. The arc weights for the second criterion are generated
randomly from interval $[1,d_1^{\max}]$, where $d_1^{\max}$ is the
maximum arc weight on the first criterion. The population size $N$
was set to $100$. To construct an approximation of the Pareto set
$A$ for each instance we run NSGA-II-DEC once and the run
continued for $5000$ iterations. The only exception is that for
series S50contr[1,2][1,2] the run continued for $500$ iterations,
and it was sufficient to find all $51$ points of the Pareto set.


We compare the following cases: $a$) when the 1st criterion is
more important than the 2nd criterion (1st-2nd case) with
$\theta_{12}$; $b$) vice versa situation with $\theta_{21}$
(2nd-1st case); $c$)~1st-2nd and 2nd-1st cases simultaneously
(1st-2nd \& 2nd-1st case). The degree of the reduction of the
Pareto set approximation was investigated with respect to
coefficient of relative importance varying from $0.1$ to $0.9$ by
step $0.1$. On all instances and in all cases for each value of
$\theta_{12}$ and $\theta_{21}$  we re-evaluate the obtained
approximation in terms of ``new'' vector criterion $\hat{D}$ upon
the formulae from Corollary~1 and Theorem~2. Then by the complete
enumeration we find the Pareto set approximation in ``new''
criterion space that gives us the reduction of the Pareto set
approximation in the
initial criterion space.% \looseness=-1

The number $N^A$ of elements of the Pareto set approximation $A$
and the percentage of the excluded elements from set $A$ with
various values of $\theta_{12}$ and $\theta_{21}$ are presented on
average over series in Tables~2 and~3.

\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}

\small

{\it Table 2.} {\bf Reduction of the Pareto set approximation for
S50[1,10][1,10]\\ and S50[1,20][1,20]}%}

%\label{tab:S50_1-10_1-10_S50_1-20_1-20}

\vskip 4mm

\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\cline{1-11}
\multicolumn{11}{|c|}{{S50[1,10][1,10], \ \ $N^A = 42.4$}}  \\
\cline{1-11}
\multirow{2}{*}{$\theta_{21}$} & \multicolumn{10}{c|}{$\theta_{12}$} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{} \\
\cline{2-11}
& \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 2nd-1st} &0.1&0.2&0.3&0.4&0.5&0.6&0.7&0.8&0.9 \\
\cline{1-11}
%\multicolumn{12}{|c|}{\bf The first criterion is more important than the second criterion}\\
%\hline
\makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 1st-2nd} &  & 7.8 & 22.8 & 42.3 & 51 & 64.3 & 70.6 & 77.1 & 88.1 & 96.7 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.1 & 10.7 & 18 & 33.1 & 51.4 & 59.3 &  72 & 77.1 & 82 & 91 & & 95.8 & 0.9 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.2 & 28.4 & 35.2 & 49.8 &   67.8 & 74.7 & 85.9 & 89.2 & 90.7 & & 95.3 & 92.3 & 0.8 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.3 & 40.3 & 46.6 & 60.3 &  77.5 & 83.5 & 93.9 & 96.6 & & 93.7 & 89.5 & 86 & 0.7 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.4 & 50.4 & 56.8 &   69.6 & 84.7 &  89.4 & 95.3 & & 94.6 & 85.6 & 78.4 & 73.5 & 0.6 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.5 & 63.3 & 69.6 &   81 & 93.5 & 95.9 & & 96.6 & 90.9 & 80.5 & 72.2 & 66.1 & 0.5 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.6 & 69.4 & 75.3 &   85.1 & 95.6 & & 96.5 & 93.6 & 87.1 & 73.3 & 63.1 & 56.2 & 0.4 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.7 & 77.8 & 82.8 & 89.6 & & 95.1 & 92.1 & 87.7 & 80.2 & 65.7 & 52.2 & 45 & 0.3 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.8 & 90.9 & 94.9 &  & 94.9 & 91.1 & 86.7  & 81.1 & 71.4 & 56.2 & 41.7 & 33.9 & 0.2 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.9 & 95.6 &  & 94.6  & 87.1 & 80.9 & 75.3 & 67.8 & 57 & 38.5 & 22.2 & 14.1 & 0.1  \\
\cline{1-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & 97 &  91.8 &  81.9 &  72.2 &  65.1 &  55.2 & 43.6 &  24.8 & 8.08 & & \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 1st-2nd}  \\
\cline{3-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & 0.9 &  0.8 &  0.7 &  0.6 &  0.5 &  0.4 & 0.3 &  0.2 &  0.1 & \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 2nd-1st} & \multirow{2}{*}{$\theta_{21}$}  \\
\cline{3-12}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & \multicolumn{10}{c|}{$\theta_{12}$} & \\
\cline{3-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & \multicolumn{11}{c|}{{S50[1,20][1,20], \ \ $N^A = 52.6$}}  \\
\cline{3-13}
\end{tabular}

\end{center} \vspace{-4mm}
\end{table}


\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}

\small

{\it Table 3.} {\bf Reduction of the Pareto set approximation for
S50[1,10][1,20] and SftvRand}%}

%\label{tab:S50_1-10_1-20_SftvRand}

\vskip 3mm

\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\cline{1-11}
\multicolumn{11}{|c|}{{S50[1,10][1,20], \ \ $N^A = 54.4$}}  \\
\cline{1-11}
\multirow{2}{*}{$\theta_{21}$} & \multicolumn{10}{c|}{$\theta_{12}$} & \multicolumn{2}{c}{} \\
\cline{2-11}
& \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 2nd-1st} &0.1&0.2&0.3&0.4&0.5&0.6&0.7&0.8&0.9 \\
\cline{1-11}
%\multicolumn{12}{|c|}{\bf The first criterion is more important than the second criterion}\\
%\hline
\makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 1st-2nd} &  & 10.9 & 24 & 38.2 & 45.5 & 56.4 & 60 & 74.6 & 85.5 & 96.4 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.1 & 21.1 & 26.6 & 36.6 & 50.1 & 60.2 &  70.7 & 75.1 & 83.8 & 90.8 & & 97.8 & 0.9 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.2 & 42.3 & 47.4 & 57.5 & 69.9 & 77.8 & 87.2 & 90.1 & 95.6 & & 97.6 & 97.1 & 0.8 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.3 & 55.1 & 59.9 & 68.8 & 80 & 85.9 & 92.3 & 94.5 & & 94.9 & 92.5 & 91.6 & 0.7 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.4 & 68 & 72 &   78.3 & 86.7 &  91.3 & 96.3 & & 96.4 & 92.3 & 88.3 & 87.2 & 0.6 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.5 & 81.1 & 82.9 &   87.3 & 93.8 & 96.3 & & 95.1 & 92.4 & 87.5 & 83.2 & 81.4 & 0.5 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.6 & 86.9 & 88 & 91.7 & 96.7 & & 96.4 & 91 & 86.9 & 80.6 & 75.4 & 72.2 & 0.4 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.7 & 94.1 & 94.5 & 96.3 & & 94.8 & 89.6 & 82 & 77.3 & 70 & 63.6 & 59.2 & 0.3 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.8 & 97.4 & 97.4 &  & 93.7 & 87.1 & 78.5 & 68 & 61.8 & 52.2 & 44.3 & 39.3 & 0.2 \\
\cline{1-13}
0.9 & 98.2 &  & 92  & 81.7 & 74.2 & 62.3 & 50.4 & 42.2 & 31.8 & 22.7 & 17 & 0.1  \\
\cline{1-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & 96 &  89.3 &  75.2 &  65.5 &  52.2 &  38.1 & 28.2 &  16 & 6.1 & & \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 1st-2nd}  \\
\cline{3-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & 0.9 &  0.8 &  0.7 &  0.6 &  0.5 &  0.4 & 0.3 &  0.2 &  0.1 & \makebox[2em]{\scriptsize 2nd-1st} & \multirow{2}{*}{$\theta_{21}$}  \\
\cline{3-12}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & \multicolumn{10}{c|}{$\theta_{12}$} & \\
\cline{3-13}
\multicolumn{2}{c|}{} & \multicolumn{11}{c|}{{SftvRand, \ \ $N^A = 59$}}  \\
\cline{3-13}

\end{tabular}

\end{center} \vspace{-5mm}
\end{table}





Each table contains data for two series, one is upper secondary
diagonal, another is lower secondary diagonal. The first column
stands for the values of $\theta_{21}$, and the second column
represents the percentage of the excluded elements for 2nd-1st
case with corresponding values of coefficient. The third line
stands for the values of $\theta_{12}$, and the fourth line
represents the percentage of the excluded elements for 1st-2nd
case with corresponding values of coefficient. Another data of the
upper table show the percentage of the excluded elements for
1st-2nd \& 2nd-1st cases (cell at the intersection of
corresponding values of $\theta_{12}$ and $\theta_{21}$ varying
from $0.1$ to $0.9$). Interpretation of data of lower table is
symmetric to the upper table.

Firstly considered the results of 1st-2nd and 2nd-1st cases. As
seen from Table~2, for series S50[1,10][1,10] and S50[1,20][1,20],
when $\theta_{12}=0.5$ or $\theta_{21}=0.5$ approximately $65 \%$
of elements of the set $A$ are excluded, and when
$\theta_{12}=0.8$ or $\theta_{21}=0.8$ approximately $10 \%$ of
elements are remained. On these series the results for
$\theta_{12}=\theta_{21}$ are similar for both 1st-2nd and 2nd-1st
cases. Note that here the difference between the maximum and
minimum values of set $A$ on the 1st criterion  is almost
identical to the difference on the 2nd criterion for all
instances. %\looseness=-1

Series SftvRand and S50[1,10][1,20] show different results: in the
1st-2nd case the reduction occurs ``almost uniformly'', i.~e. the
value of $\theta_{12}$ is almost proportional to the degree of the
reduction, in the 2nd-1st case the condition $\theta_{21} = 0.5$
gives approximately $80 \%$ of the excluded elements. Also, we
note that   the percentage of the excluded elements in the 2nd-1st
case for $\theta_{21} = 0.5$ is approximately $1.5$ times greater
than the percentage of the excluded elements in the 1st-2nd case
for $\theta_{12}=0.5$. We suppose that this is due to the
difference between the maximum and minimum values of set $A$ on
the 1st criterion  is at least $1.5$ times smaller than the
difference on the 2nd criterion for all instances. %\looseness=-1


Secondly we study the results of 1st-2nd \& 2nd-1st cases. Let us
fix some value of $\theta_{12}$, when the 1st criterion is more
important than the 2nd one, and consider the values of percentage
of the excluded elements varying $\theta_{21}$ in the feasible
interval, when the 2nd criterion is more important than the 1st
one. For example, if we put $\theta_{12} = 0.4$ for series
S50[1,10][1,10], then varying $\theta_{21}$ from $0.1$ till $0.5$
we get the column $59.3$, $74.7$, $83.5$, $89.4$, $95.9$. Also we
investigate vice versa situation, when we fix some value of
$\theta_{21}$, change values of $\theta_{12}$, and get the
corresponding line. According Table~2 for both series
S50[1,10][1,10] and S50[1,20][1,20] we conclude, that
the ratio between percentage of the excluded elements for some fixed value of $\theta_{12}$ and percentage, %at the line
when we fix $\theta_{21}$ with the same value, is approximately
equal to 1. Thus the reduction occurs ``almost uniformly''.

From Table~3 we see, that for series S50[1,10][1,20]
the ratio of percentage of the excluded elements at the column with fixed $\theta_{12} = 0.1$ % at the line with
over percentage at the line with fixed $\theta_{21} = 0.1$ changes
from $1.29$ till $1.07$. When we fix $\theta_{12} = 0.6$ and
$\theta_{21} = 0.6$, the ratio changes\linebreak\newpage\noindent
from $0.85$ till $0.98$. In total, the average ratio is greater
than 1 for fixed $0.1 \leqslant \theta_{12} = \theta_{21}
\leqslant 0.2$, and the average ratio is smaller than 1 for fixed
$0.3 \leqslant \theta_{12} = \theta_{21} \leqslant 0.8$.

For series SftvRand we conclude that the ratio of percentage of
the excluded elements when we fix $\theta_{12} = 0.1$ to
percentage when $\theta_{21} = 0.1$ changes from $1.39$ till
$1.06$. When we fix $\theta_{12} = 0.6$ and $\theta_{21} = 0.6$,
the ratio changes from $0.84$ till $0.98$. The average ratio for
various fixed $\theta_{12}=\theta_{21}$ has the same tendency as
for the series S50[1,10][1,20].

Thus, we investigate symmetric situations: $a$) when the 1st
criterion is more important than the 2nd one with fixed
$\theta_{12}$ and the 2nd criterion is more important than the 1st
one with varied $\theta_{21}$; $b$) when the 2nd criterion is more
important than the 1st one with fixed $\theta_{21}$ and the 1st
criterion is more important than the 2nd one with varied
$\theta_{12}$. We can state that more elements of the Pareto set
are excluded with a small fixed coefficient of relative importance
(no more than $0.2$), when we analyze situation $a$) in comparison
with situation $b$) for both series S50[1,10][1,20] and SftvRand.
Otherwise, more elements of the Pareto set are eliminated, when we
fix coefficient of relative importance at a medium or a high value
(at least $0.3$) in situation $b$) compared to situation $a$).


As a result we conclude that in the 1st-2nd \& 2nd-1st cases the
difference between the maximum and minimum values of set $A$ on
criteria also influences on the degree of reduction.

The results of the experiment on series S50contr[1,2][1,2] confirm
the theoretical results of subsection~3.2 (Theorems~3--5}). In
1st-2nd and 2nd-1st cases we do not have a reduction, when
coefficient of relative importance is lower than $0.5$, and the
reduction up to one element takes place if the otherwise
inequality occurs. In 1st-2nd \& 2nd-1st cases, if $\theta_{12}
\geqslant 0.5$ or $\theta_{21} \geqslant 0.5$, is valid, then the
reduction of the Pareto set approximation consists of only one
element. If both inequalities $\theta_{12} < 0.5$ and $\theta_{21}
< 0.5$ hold, then the reduction does not occur.


The results for series with $n=12$ from the previous subsection
are analogous. Based on the results of the experiment we suppose
that the degree of the reduction of the Pareto set approximation
will be similar for the large-size problems with the same
structure as the considered instances. %\looseness=-1



\textbf{6. Conclusion.} We applied to the bi-ATSP  the axiomatic
approach of the Pareto set reduction proposed by V.~Noghin. For
particular cases the series of ``quanta of information'' that
guarantee the reduction of the Pareto set were identified. An
approximation of the Pareto set to the bi-ATSP was found by a
generational multiobjective genetic algorithm with new crossovers
involving the Pareto relation. The experimental evaluation
indicated the degree of reduction of the Pareto set approximation
for various problem structures in the case of one and two ``quanta
of information''.

Further research may include construction and analysis of new
classes of multicriteria ATSP instances with complex structures of
the Pareto set. In particular, bi-ATSP with  objectives of
different type (for example, the first criterion is the sum of arc
weights, and the second one is the maximum arc weight). It is also
important to consider real-life ATSP instances with real-life
decision maker  and investigate effectiveness of the axiomatic
approach for them. Moreover, developing a faster implementation of the multiobjective genetic algorithm %with steady-state replacement
using more effective non-domination sorting, combination of
exploitive and explorative crossovers,  and local search
procedures has great interest.

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
%\newpage
\input{10/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи
%
%\newpage
\input{10/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
{\footnotesize
%
%\thispagestyle{empty}
%
\vskip 3mm
%
\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %
%
}
