%
{\footnotesize \noindent$\issueyear$\mbox{~~~~~~~~~~}
ВЕСТНИК\,САНКТ-ПЕТЕРБУРГСКОГО\,УНИВЕРСИТЕТА
Т.\,15.\,\,Вып.\,$\issuenum$\linebreak %
\mbox{~~~~~~~~~~}ПРИКЛАДНАЯ МАТЕМАТИКА. ИНФОРМАТИКА. ПРОЦЕССЫ
УПРАВЛЕНИЯ %
}

%\ \\ \vskip 0.8mm\hrule \\ \hrule \\ \ \\

\vskip 0.5mm

\hline\vskip .5mm

\hline

\vspace{1.8cm} \noindent {\large ИНФОРМАТИКА} \vspace{1.8cm}

\noindent{\small UDC 004.738.5:51-7\\ %  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~14.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 68R10

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Application of webometrics methods for analysis and
enhancement\\ of academic site structure
based on page value criterion%$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it A.~M.~Nwohiri$\,^1$, A.~A.~Pechnikov$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
}

\efootnote{
%%
%\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ This work was supported by Russian Foundation
%for Basic Research (project N 17-07-00371) and by the Ministry of
%Science and Education of the Russian Federation (under the 5-100
%Excellence Programme).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
%

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
University of Lagos, University Road, Akoka, Yaba, Lagos,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
101017, Nigeria

\noindent%
$^2$~%
Institute of Applied Mathematical Research of the Karelian
Research Centre,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
Russian Academy of Sciences, 11, Pushkinskaya ul., Petrozavodsk,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
185910, Russian Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:} Nwohiri A. M., Pechnikov
A. A. Application of webometrics methods for analysis and
enhancement of academic site structure based on page value
criterion. {\it Vestnik of Saint~Pe\-tersburg University. Applied
Mathematics. Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear,
vol.~15, iss.~\issuenum, pp.~\pageref{p4}--\pageref{p4e}.
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent This paper describes a formalized
procedure for exploring a site using webometrics methods. The
procedure involves gathering details on a site's structure,
constructing and exploring the resulting webgraph, defining the
correctness criterion, identifying control actions that would
improve the structure under the given criterion, testing the
correctness criterion on real-world examples and developing
recommendations on improving the structure. PageRank is used as a
criterion to evaluate the value of web pages. The value is
determined by the presence/absence of a link pointing to that page
from the homepage of the site. Going by the correctness criterion,
valuable pages of a site should have the highest PageRank among
all other pages of that site. Control action consists of removing
non-valuable directories (and transforming them into independent
sites), whose root page has a high PageRank. Experiments are
conducted on three faculty sites of major universities in USA,
Russia and Nigeria. The approach is shown to be applicable and
reasonable in all cases.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: website, graph, PageRank, universities, data
mining, website structure, web har\-vesting, web mining, URL.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\textbf{1. Introduction.} This paper explores webometrics
techniques with the aim of improving the structure of a~website.
These techniques are based on web graph analysis. Webometrics
(also cybermetrics) is a~branch of computer science dedicated to
the study of the quantitative aspects of the construction and use
of information resources, structures and technologies in relation
to the web [1, 2].

The html pages of a~site and the hyperlinks connecting those pages
may be respectively viewed as nodes and arcs in a~directed
webgraph of that site. The webgraph is one of the most natural
mathematical models of the web. Webgraph is a~directed graph
consisting of html pages (nodes) and hypertext links (arcs)
connecting the pages. A webgraph could be examined ``in general''
at the initial stage of web development. A good example is the
bow-tie structure by [3], where about two hundred million pages,
indexed by the AltaVista search engine, were used as nodes. With
rapid evolution in web science, websites (and their interconnected
sets, which are fragments of the ``big'' web) have replaced web
pages as structural units of research. However, such structures
are well interpreted by graphs [4,~5].

Today, websites are used as complex and attractive tools for
exploring web objects that are sometimes comparable to web
fragments. For example, Google search engine was used to find
about 40,000 web pages on the website of the University of Oxford
(www.ox.ac.uk). It is therefore rational to apply known approaches
and techniques, including the webgraph (as the model of site
structure), in the study of a~site structure.

Analysis of a~webgraph as a~website model has uncovered features,
which, when interpreted on a~real site, provide guidelines on how
to structurally improve a~site. This subject is well covered in
[6, 7].

In this work, it is assumed that website design and maintenance is
a~goal-oriented process. It is also supposed that site owners are
always thinking on how to improve their site without always
clearly articulating the improvement criteria. Unlike many other
web resources, the websites of business entities, research
institutions, and universities can be referred to as the so-called
``regulated web resources''. Regulated means there are official
regulations setting out the goals and objectives of such website,
the main structural components, the rules for adding and modifying
information on that site, etc. Such regulations should exist.
However, most official websites were found not to have such
regulations. To control some processes in the web, one would need
to formulate managerial decisions via official documents. The
methods by which such decisions are implemented ought to be
outlined. Before the appropriate managerial decisions are
implemented, information on the particular subject area (in this
particular case~--- website) is gathered. This eventually leads to
construction of the formal models of the subject area, formulation
and solving of optimization problems. One must define the
potentially possible correctness criteria for the site and the
so-called ``control actions''. Recommendations on how to boost the
site under such criteria must be developed. Control actions are
treated in the sub-section ``Determining the Correctness Criterion
for a~Website Structure''.

Below is a~brief description of the mathematical modeling process
with regards to a~website as the subject area.\\


\textbf{Step 1:} Gathering some data about the website structure.


\textbf{Step 2:} Using the gathered data to construct and explore
a~webgraph for the site.


\textbf{Step 3:} Defining a~possible correctness criterion for the
website structure.


\textbf{Step 4:} Outlining control actions that would improve the
site structure under the given correctness criterion.


\textbf{Step 5:} Coming up with recommendations and guidelines on
how to enhance the site structure.\\
%\end{itemize}


The above steps are applied on specific websites of faculties from
three selected major universities in Nigeria, Russian Federation
and USA (see section~4).

To the authors, it is submitted that the discovered properties of
these sites~--- relatively huge number of web pages, content
diversity, sufficiently independent fragments, and others~---
provide a~platform for explaining (through simple and
understandable examples) all the steps involved in the research.

The proposed procedure comes with high level of generality. It can
be applied to the study of many websites. Obvious constraints are
down to the actual sizes of sites, features of the software used
and the power of computing resources.

%\smallskip

\textbf{2. Background.} The study of the web as a~graph and the
analysis of hyperlink structure are fairly new areas of research.
Research on webgraph structure gives valuable insight into the
social mechanisms governing the evolution of structure. Such
studies are important for creating better crawling algorithms,
designing ranking techniques, and building clear-cut web structure
models.

Experiments on the local and global properties of a~webgraph were
presented in [3]. These properties were revealed using the data
harvested by Altavista search engine. The authors claim that the
macroscopic structure of the web is significantly more complicated
than suggested by earlier experiments on a~smaller scale.

Link relationships in the Nordic academic web space, comprising of
23 Finnish, 11~Da\-nish and 28 Swedish academic web domains were
investigated by [4]. It was discovered that the Nordic network is
made of a~cohesive network of three clearly defined sub-networks.
It was also uncovered that this Nordic network rests on the
Finnish and Swedish sub-networks.

Page categorization was applied in [5] to show that one can
produce even stronger associations by restricting the metrics to
subsets that are more closely connected to the research of the
host university. The authors found that there was a~partial
overlap between the effects of applying advanced document models
and separating page types. However, it was argued that combination
of the two achieved the best results.

A new technique for evaluating and improving website link
structure (by using web usage mining) and assessing the usage
pattern of an Iranian organization, was outlined in [6]. The study
found that the use of graph theory in assessing website usability
has some advantages over other methods of website usability and
structure analysis.

A new class of processes ``the web Markov skeleton processes''
(WMSP) arising from information retrieval on the web, were
proposed and discussed by [7]. The paper examined the scope and
time homogeneity of WMSPs, and explored a~new class of processes,
the so-called mirror semi-Markov processes. Some WMSPs
applications in computing the importance of a~page on the web were
briefly reviewed.

In [8], webometrics techniques were, for the first time, deployed
to analyze the websites of the academic institutes of the Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (SB~RAS). The
researchers used Google, Yahoo and Yandex search engines to
uncover the quantitative characteristics of the sites. Out of the
80 sites (institutes) studied, about $39\,\%$ of them were found
to have small number of pages (less than 100 pages), while
$24\,\%$ have very large number of pages (above 1000 pages). It
was also established that 12 institutes have over 1000 external
links, while 20 institutes ($25\,\%$) have just less than 100
external links.

Two webspaces~--- one belonging to the academic institutions of
SB~RAS, and the other belonging to Fraunhofer---Gesellschaft,
a~German research organization~--- were investigated in [9]. The
scientific communities of the underlying websites were examined.
A~mathematical model for the academic webspaces of the two
organizations was presented. A~hypothesis that communities in
these academic networks should reflect scientific collaborations
between the corresponding institutes was proposed and checked for
SB RAS.

A~large webgraph comprising of over 3.5 billion web pages and
128.7 billion hyperlinks was analyzed in [10]. Features such as
degree distributions, connectivity, average distances, and the
structure of weakly/strongly-connected components were analyzed
and compared. Results showed that some of the features previously
observed in [3] were very dependent on artefacts of the crawling
process, whereas others appear to be more structural. However, the
authors found that very different proportions of nodes can reach
or can be reached from the discovered giant strongly connected
component, suggesting that the ``bow-tie structure''~--- as
described in [3]~--- is strongly dependent on the crawling
process. It was thus concluded that the ``bow-tie structure'' is
not a~structural property of the web.

%\smallskip

\textbf{3. Methods.} A~website consists of html pages and web
documents linked to each other by internal hyperlinks. This
collection is unique in content and identified on the web with
a~unique domain name.

Based on the above definition, the ``site/sub-site'' and
``domain/sub-domain'' relation\-ships are not used in this
research. For example, the Faculty of Applied Mathematics and
Control Processes (apmath.spbu.ru) is under Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg
State University (www.spbu.ru). Howe\-ver, both have different
sites. So in this context, both sites are considered as different
sites in this paper.

This approach is justified. There are many cases where the parent
website of an organiza\-tion is developed and administered by one
group of employees, while the sites of departments, conferences,
and journals falling under the same organization, are administered
by another group. In such cases, it is safe to say that the sites
do not have unified goals or common creation and functioning
approaches and methods.

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{3.1. Generating the structural summary of a~site.}}
To build a~website model, details about html pages and site
documents, and of course the internal hyperlinks connecting them
are needed.

Web crawlers are used to retrieve data from the web. These
crawlers scan through web pages and/or web documents to harvest
certain information, identify patterns, create statistics or
preserve site resources [11]. For example, web spider engine
JSPider (http://jspi\-ders.com) reviewed by [12], basically deals
with construction of site structure. There are so many other
publicly accessible web crawlers that can be deployed to scan
a~website.

However, for some important reasons, the authors in this paper
preferred using their own web crawler called Rapid Configurable
Crawler (RCCrawler) [13]. One of such important reasons is the
problem of dust~--- a~situation whereby different URLs have
similar text. As pointed out by [14, p.~1],
%\emph{}
``{Such duplicate URLs are prevalent in web sites, as web server
software often uses aliases and redirections, translates URLs to
some canonical form, and dynamically generates the same page from
various different URL requests}''.

The ability to detect and remove dust from previous crawl logs
enhances crawling efficiency, reduces crawling time and improves
the credibility of popularity indicators. In other publicly
accessible web crawlers, the authors do not know how the dust
problem is resolved and whether it was even resolved. In cases
where the dust problem is not resolved, using such a~crawler would
introduce ``extra'' nodes in the webgraph, thereby corrupting and
complicating the graph model. The dust problem is resolved in
RCCrawler.

Investigations have shown that new tasks and functions emerge when
gathering and interpreting information. Thus, constant improvement
in crawling capabilities has been made necessary. Lack of
documentation complicates the process of implementing such tasks
and functions. So another reason why RCCrawler was chosen consists
of the differences in research approaches and problem statements.
This is reflected in the algorithms and structures of hyperlink
databases. In addition, the choice of a~particular crawler largely
depends on crawling convenience and on credibility of obtained
results.

RCCrawler is a~cross-platform application framework written in C++
(C++11 stan\-dard) using a~set of libraries and an additional
preprocessor. It comes with a~common ar\-chi\-tec\-tu\-re that can
be instantiated by certain classes and, thus, implement various
crawling tasks. Detailed description of the structure, technical
features, specific tasks and usage examples of RCCrawler are
presented in [13].

The web robot systematically browses a~site, starting from the
home (index) page and navigating via internal hyperlinks in
a~given traversal order. This is known as the breadth-first search
[15]. The required scan depth can be set. After scanning a~site,
the crawler generates SCV files containing lists of internal
hyperlinks connecting the files.

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{3.2. Webgraph construction and investigation.}}
Information about html pages, web documents and internal
hyperlinks harvested by RCCrawler is used to construct the
webgraph of that particular site. The nodes of this webgraph are
the html pages and web documents found, while the arcs are the
hyperlinks discovered.

A webgraph has three important and pretty obvious properties:


\textbullet\quad the webgraph of a~site has a~dedicated source
node~--- the homepage (index page) of that site;


\textbullet\quad the level structure of the webgraph of a~site can
be determined using the distance of any
 web page from the homepage;


\textbullet\quad the webgraph of a~site is always a~connected
graph and is almost always a~strongly connected graph.
%\end{itemize}


In graph theory, the level of the source node of a~webgraph is 0.
The level of nodes that can be accessed from the source node in
one step is 1. The level of nodes that can be accessed from the
source node in two steps is 2, etc.

The connectivity property is inherent in any webgraph built both
on a~set of html pages and on a~set of html pages and web
documents. This ensues from the way a~site is traversed~--- lists
of all subsequent pages are generated when analyzing the previous
ones, starting with the homepage. Obviously, nodes representing
web documents are the leaf nodes~--- have incoming but no outgoing
arcs. Not all webgraphs are strongly connected. For example,
a~graph containing leaf nodes is not a~strongly connected graph. A
webgraph containing only a~set of html pages is almost always
a~strongly connected graph because any page in the site contains
at least one link pointing to the home page. Such a~single link
could be the logo of the organization pasted on each page.
Figure~1 shows an example of a~webgraph. The root node (homepage)
is designated as page0. Nodes page1, page2, and page3 are level 1
nodes (pages with direct links to/from the homepage).

%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[scale = 0.1]{Figure1.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%{\small{\emph{Figure~1.}  Webgraph of a~website}}
%\end{center}


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=0.98]{04/fig1}

\vskip 0mm {\small{\it Figure 1.} Webgraph of a~website} }
\end{figure}



Gephi~--- a~visualization software system for all kinds of graphs
and networks [16]~--- was used to analyze the webgraphs of sites.
This program visualizes and draws graph. It also calculates basic
characteristics, such as node degree, graph diameter, graph
density, modularity, PageRank, connected components and other
indicators.

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{3.3. Determining the Correctness Criterion for
a~Website Structure.}} This section deals with one of the most
important methodological problems in webometrics: what is the real
purpose of creating a~website? As mentioned earlier, when the
rules governing a~site are known, one can formulate criteria that
tell whether implementation of a~site complies with requirements
stated in relevant regulations.

In most cases known to the authors, there are no such regulations.
So, the authors try to formulate a~plausible correctness criterion
for a~site structure. The criterion will depend on common sense,
the author's web development experience, and experiments conducted
on a~large set of real websites.

One of the most famous tools used in estimating the value or
quality of pages on the web is the PageRank [17]. The authors use
the PageRank (PR) to determine how important the pages of
a~website are. This is based only on the site's internal
structure. It involves calculating the PR of the webgraph nodes
(pages) of the site.

In a~perfect case, the following could be the correctness
criterion for a~website structure: for web developers, pages with
the highest PRs are the most ``valuable'' pages of a~site.

However, the situation considered in this paper is a~non-perfect
case. Therefore, the most valuable web pages need to be defined.
It is assumed that the homepage of a~site and other pages
corresponding to major sections on that site are considered as
valuable pages by web developers. In this research, nodes of
a~graph representing valuable pages are called valuable nodes.

The valuable web pages of a~particular site are identified as
follows:\\


\textbf{Step\,\,1:} The site in question is scanned using
RCCrawler.


\textbf{Step\,\,2:} With the data harvested by RCCrawler, the
webgraph of that site is constructed.


\textbf{Step\,\,3:} The PR value of each node (page) of the
constructed webgraph is calculated.


\textbf{Step\,\,4:} The calculated PR values are arranged in
descending order.


\textbf{Step\,\,5:} The arranged PR vector is plotted against the
number of pages (Figure~2).%\\
%\end{itemize}


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig2}

\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 2.} Graph of PR values of webgraph
nodes for cmns.umd.edu} }
\end{figure}


%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.7\textwidth]{Figure2.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%{\small{\emph{Figure~2.} Graph of PR values of webgraph nodes for
%cmns.umd.edu}}
%\end{center}


Such a~graph (PR distribution) is characteristic of any webgraph
of a~modern website~--- valuable nodes (pages) typically have the
highest PR values and such nodes are not much in number [18].

From the above-stated, it can be concluded that valuable nodes
with low PRs and non-valuable nodes with high PRs violate the
correctness criterion.

So for a~given website, the procedure for detecting any violations
of the correctness criterion can be described as follows:\\


\textbf{Step\,\,1:} On the homepage of that website, all the
headings of major sections (pointing to corresponding pages) is
visually identified.


\textbf{Step\,\,2:} These identified headings are then used to
create a~list containing the home\-page URL and the URLs of
valuable pages.


\textbf{Step\,\,3:} For the constructed webgraph of the site,
a~vector of the PRs of all the nodes (pages) of the webgraph is
computed. In this vector, only valuable nodes are assigned numbers
starting from number 1. The homepage (being one of the valuable
nodes) is assigned number 1.


\textbf{Step\,\,4:} The vector is ordered in descending order of
PRs.


\textbf{Step\,\,5:} The list of valuable pages (Step 2) and the
ordered PR vector (Step 4) are compared to identify any valuable
page with low PR or non-valuable page with high PR, which are
correctness criterion violations.


\textbf{Step\,\,6:} A~list of nodes violating the correctness
criterion is created.\\
%\end{itemize}

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{3.4. Control actions.}} The term ``control action''
means the addition and/or removal of new pages, documents and
internal hyperlinks from a~site. Obviously, control actions can
differ very significantly~--- there are many of such actions and
they are difficult to formalize. The authors believe that this is
a~separate area for further research.

Addition of new pages, documents and links to a~site always
depends on the behavior of the external environment of the site. A
site usually reflects the activities of its owner. For example, if
a~newly employed lecturer has his profile page added in the
website of the university, then links pointing to the pages of
that lecturer's department and faculty, and maybe also to the
sports club (if the lecturer does sports), need to be added in
this new profile page. This is what is meant by ``behavior of the
external environment''.

It is difficult to formalize and model the behavior of the
external environment. However, it is somewhat much easier to
formalize and model the action of removing pages, documents and
links from a~website. By analyzing a~particular site, one can
identify the conceptual meaning of such removal. For example, if
a~lecturer is fired from the university, then links pointing
from/to his profile page to/from other pages of the university
website are simply deleted. If the lecturer had several pages
(directory), then his directory and all links pointing from/to it
are deleted. Besides, removal of a~directory does not always mean
that it has been totally eliminated. For example, the lecturer may
have decided to create his own personal website instead of
a~section (directory) on the university's website. In this
particular case, ``removal'' means ``creating a~new site and
removing directory from the old site''. This action is much easier
to formalize.

The removal procedure is most obvious when it comes to empty
pages, irrelevant and outdated documents, etc.

As shown in the above example, removal of some part of a~site does
not often imply physical removal. In many cases, it means
transforming such part into an independent site with a~unique
domain name, and at the same time, retaining the hyperlinks (now
external hyperlinks) linking that initial part to the parent site.

Such a~process is natural for university web resources. Evolution
of the web space of Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg State University over 20
years of its existence was shown in [19]. The web space was
initially composed of only the official university website and
gradually grew to 280~inde\-pen\-dent sites of faculties,
institutes and administrative divisions. Many of these bodies
where previously sections in the official website of the
university.

In this paper, therefore, control actions involve removing pages,
documents and links from a~website.

Understandably, the authors cannot delete a~part of a~real site
since they are not professional web developers. However, they can
experiment on the webgraph of the site in question to see the
effect of such actions. In the simplest case, this involves
removing some nodes and all their incident arcs.

A more challenging task is to remove some part of the graph. This
means removing a~certain number of nodes and their incident arcs.

In this paper, a~part of a~graph to be deleted is a~sub-graph of
the graph for which the root node is given. The remaining nodes
are formed as follows:\\


\textbf{Step 1:} All the child nodes of the root node are
selected.


\textbf{Step 2:} For all the child nodes selected in Step 1, all
the nodes lying one level lower (the direct children of the child
nodes selected in Step 1) are selected.


\textbf{Step 3:} This process is continued until leaf nodes are
reached.\\
%\end{itemize}


In web development, a~part of a~website to be deleted is
considered a~subdirectory, whose root is the page representing the
selected node.

In subsequent experiments, only one type of control action is
considered: removal of parts of graph. In this case, of particular
interest is the question of whether the PageRank of the remaining
valuable pages will improve or not. I should be noted that:

\textbullet\quad there are many ways to change the structure of
a~site;

\textbullet\quad this research is experimenting on only one of
them~--- removal of ``bad'' valuable pages;

\textbullet\quad the research is NOT interested in what happens to
the ``deleted'' content; may be NEW sites are created from them or
may be not;

\textbullet\quad the research is interested in what would happen
to the PageRank of the remaining (non-deleted) valuable pages. If
the PR increases, then that's great, if it reduces but remains
high, that's also good.
%\end{itemize}

%\smallskip

\textbf{4. Experiments and results.} The websites of faculties and
colleges of three selected major universities in Nigeria, Russian
Federation and USA were selected as the experimental samples.
Experiments have clearly shown that the described approach is
feasible. The websites are:

\textbullet\quad http://engineering.unn.edu.ng~--- Faculty of
Engineering, University of Nigeria, Nsukka;

\textbullet\quad http://www.apmath.spbu.ru~--- Faculty of Applied
Mathematics and Control Processes, Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg State
University, Russian Federation;

\textbullet\quad http://cmns.umd.edu~--- College of Computer,
Mathematical, and Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, USA.
%\end{itemize}

These websites are characterized by different sizes and content
diversity. They are broken down into sufficiently independent
fragments. With the above main features and a~number of others,
all the steps involved in the approach can be conveniently
presented through simple examples. The following abbreviations are
used:

\textbullet\quad \textbf{FOE}: Faculty of Engineering, University
of Nigeria, Nsukka;

\textbullet\quad \textbf{AMCP}: Faculty of Applied Mathematics and
Control Processes, Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg State University, Russian
Federation;

\textbullet\quad \textbf{CMNS}: College of Computer, Mathematical,
and Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, USA.
%\end{itemize}

For AMCP and CMNS experiments, RCCrawler scanned up to five levels
deep~--- from 0 to 4. The reasoning behind this action is that
pages below level 4 contribute little or nothing to the main
features of a~webgraph [20]. For FOE experiment, the crawler
scanned all the levels because of the small size of the site
(small page count). The FOE has only four levels.

In terms of graph-theoretical model, documents contained in
websites are leaf nodes that do not have outgoing arcs. They have
no significant influence on graph connectivity. Therefore, the
authors restrict themselves only to html pages.

Taking into account the above said, the websites were scanned with
the RCCrawler. The scanning results are shown in Table~1.


\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table 1.} {\bf Scanning results}%

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{| p{85mm} | c | c |}
\hline \hfil
{Websites} & %\quad
{Page count} %\quad\null
 & %\quad
 {Link count} %\quad\null
  \\
\hline
http://engineering.unn.edu.ng (Faculty of Engineering, University of Nigeria, Nsukka) & 79 & 1.680 \\
\hline
http://www.apmath.spbu.ru (Faculty of Applied Mathematics and Control Processes, Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg State University, Russian Federation) & 3.812 & 242.202 \\
\hline
http://cmns.umd.edu (College of Computer, Mathematical, and Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, USA) & 478 & 9.296 \\
\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}\vspace{-3mm}
\end{table}


Images of the webgraphs (in different scales) constructed in
Gephi, are shown in Figure~3. The source (root) node of the graph
is located approximately at the center of each figure. The
remaining nodes are depicted depending on their degree of distance
from the source node.


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig3}

\vskip 2mm {\small{\it Figure 3.} Webgraphs of FOE ($a$), AMCP
($b$) and CMNS ($c$)} }}
\end{figure}


%\begin{center}
%a) \hspace*{0.25\textwidth} b) \hspace*{0.26\textwidth} c)
%\hspace*{0.29\textwidth} \null
%
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figure3.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%{\small{\emph{Figure~3.}  Web graphs of FOE (a), AMCP (b) and CMNS
%(c)}}
%\end{center}


A cursory look at the images shows that the FOE graph is symmetric
in nature, the AMCP graph is incoherent, while the CMNS graph is
compact.

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{4.1. Website of the Faculty of Engineering,
University of Nigeria, Nsukka.}} The analysis starts with a~visual
and simple case for FOE. Table~2 is constructed in accordance with
the procedure described in the section ``Determining the
Correctness Criterion for a~Website Structure''.


\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table 2.} {\bf Details of the top pages of the FOE site,\\
corresponding to the webgraph nodes}%

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{| c | %m
p{2.65cm} | %m
p{5.4cm} | c | c |} \hline
Number    &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
assigned  &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
to        &\hfil{Section title}&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR & PR-reduce \\[-1mm]
valuable  &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
page      &                    &                  &    &           \\
\hline
1 & Main & / & 0.0586 & 0.0408\\
\hline
10 & Alumni & /alumni/ & 0.0585 & delete\\
\hline
no num & Administrative Building & /2015/11/12/slider1/ & 0.0358 & delete\\
\hline
2 & History & /about/history/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
3 & Key Officers & /about/key-officers/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
4 & Dean's Statement & /about/deans-statement/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
5 & Philosophy & /faculty/philosophy/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
6 & Admission Requirement & /faculty/admission-requirement/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
7 & Departments & /faculty/departments/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
8 & Staff Profiles & /faculty/staff-profiles/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
9 & External Resources & /external-resources/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
11 & Contact Us & contact-us/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
12 & Agric. Bio resources Engineering & /faculty/departments/agric-bioresources-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
13 & Civil Engineering & /faculty/departments/civil-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
14 & Electrical Engineering & /faculty/departments/electrical-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
15 & Electronic Engineering & /faculty/departments/electronic-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
16 & Mechanical Engineering & /faculty/departments/mechanical-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
17 & Metallurgical Mate\-rials Engineering & /faculty/departments/metallurgical-materials-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}\vspace{-6mm}
\end{table}



%\begin{center}
%\emph{Table 2.} \textbf{Details of the top pages of the FOE site,
%corresponding to the web graph nodes}
%
%\vspace*{-1mm}
%
%\begin{table}[h]\footnotesize\baselineskip=1.6ex
%\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.25}
%\renewcommand{\tabcolsep}{1.2mm}
%\begin{center}\begin{tabular}{| c | m{2.65cm} | m{6.4cm} | c | c |}
%\hline
%Number    &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%assigned  &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%to        &\hfil{Section title}&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR & PR-reduce \\[-1mm]
%valuable  &                    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%page      &                    &                  &    &           \\
%\hline
%1 & Main & / & 0.0586 & 0.0408\\
%\hline
%10 & Alumni & /alumni/ & 0.0585 & delete\\
%\hline
%no num & Administrative Building & /2015/11/12/slider1/ & 0.0358 & delete\\
%\hline
%2 & History & /about/history/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%3 & Key Officers & /about/key-officers/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%4 & Dean's Statement & /about/deans-statement/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%5 & Philosophy & /faculty/philosophy/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%6 & Admission Requirement & /faculty/admission-requirement/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%7 & Departments & /faculty/departments/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%8 & Staff Profiles & /faculty/staff-profiles/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%9 & External Resources & /external-resources/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%11 & Contact Us & contact-us/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%12 & Agric. Bio resources Engineering & /faculty/departments/agric-bioresources-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%13 & Civil Engineering & /faculty/departments/civil-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%14 & Electrical Engineering & /faculty/departments/electrical-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%15 & Electronic Engineering & /faculty/departments/electronic-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%16 & Mechanical Engineering & /faculty/departments/mechanical-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%17 & Metallurgical Materials Engineering & /faculty/departments/metallurgical-materials-engineering/ & 0.0358 & 0.0424\\
%\hline
%\end{tabular}\end{center}
%\end{table}
%\end{center}


The first column of Table~2 contains the valuable page count of
the site. The numbering is done starting from the left to the
right of the sections of the main menu of the homepage of the site
engineering.unn.edu.ng, taking into account popup submenu.
Figure~4 shows the image of this page with the added numbers of
some sections. The names of sections are contained in the second
column.

%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.5\textwidth,trim=48mm 0mm 48mm 0mm,clip=true]{Figure4.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%{\small{\emph{Figure~4.}  Part of the homepage of the FOE website
%engineering.unn.edu.ng}}
%\end{center}


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig4}

\vskip 4mm {\small{\it Figure 4.} Part of the homepage of the FOE
website engineering.unn.edu.ng} }
\end{figure}


\vskip 1mm The URL column contains short addresses of the pages of
the corresponding sections, without specifying the ``http''
protocol and the host http://engineering.unn.edu.ng. The table
rows are ordered based on the descending order of PR values in the
fourth column. These values are calculated (using Gephi) from
a~webgraph constructed using the obtained scan data.



In accordance with the procedure described in the section
``Determining the Correctness Criterion for a~Website Structure'',
the page corresponding to ``Alumni'' is found to have a~very high
PR compared to other valuable pages. Though not a~valuable page
(therefore no number is assigned to it), the ``Administrative
Building'' page has a~high PR.

The ``Alumni'' page was found to be empty and contains only one
link to an equally empty directory. The ``Administrative
Building'' page does not contain anything new, except the photo of
the administrative building. Deleting the ``Alumni'',
``Alumni/cgi-bin'' and ``Administrative Building'' pages are the
possible control actions in this case. The above action is
simulated on a~webgraph~--- the nodes corresponding to the
``Alumni'', ``Alumni/cgi-bin'', and ``Administrative Building''
pages and all their incident arcs are deleted from the webgraph.
The ``PR-reduce'' values placed in the fifth column of Table 2
represent the PR values computed after control actions have been
implemented.

Analysis shows that by removing two empty and one less informative
page from the site, the PR value of almost all the valuable pages
increases by 18\,\%.

Curiously, the PR value of the homepage decreases by 14\,\%.
Theoretical investigations into the structure of the websites have
shown that such a~difference~--- where the PR value of level\,\,1
pages is higher than that of level\,\,0~--- is not abnormal [21].
This claim is verified later in the CMNS experiment.

%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{4.2. Website of the Faculty of Applied Mathematics
and Control Processes, Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg State University,
Russian Federation.}} Figure~5 shows the homepage of the website
(Russian version) of the Faculty of AMCP. The sections marked with
numbers and highlighted in ovals are the valuable pages of the
website. The ``Section title'' column is added in the comparison
table (Table~3). This column contains Russian-to-English
translated page names. As before, the ``http'' protocol and host
``http://www.apmath.spbu.ru'' are omitted in the ``Webpage URL''
column.

%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.72\textwidth]{Figure5.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%{\small{\emph{Figure~5.} Part of the homepage of the AMCP website
%apmath.spbu.ru}}
%\end{center}

\vskip 1mm

\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig5}

\vskip 4mm {\small{\it Figure 5.} Part of the homepage of the AMCP
website apmath.spbu.ru} }
\end{figure}

\vskip 1mm


In Table~3, part of the pages had to be skipped because valuable
page ``Science'' oc\-cupies only 25th~position in the ordered PR
vector, while the ``Information'' page occupies 54th~position.
This means most of the valuable pages have very low PRs. It is not
really a~good sign when the PR of the ``Web feed'' page is six
times higher than the PR of the Home page. The following actions
are performed on the webgraph:


\textbullet\quad the ``Other'' node is removed;

\textbullet\quad all the nodes and arcs that make up the directory
(for the site), whose root corresponds to the ``Other'' node are
removed;

\textbullet\quad all the arcs incident to the removed nodes are
removed.
%\end{itemize}



After these operations, the sub-graph deleted contains 1.914 nodes
and 97.892 arcs. This is essentially half of the entire webgraph
of the site.%\newpage

\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table 3.} {\bf Details of some pages of the AMCP site,\\
representing the nodes of the webgraph}%

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{| c | %m
p{2.2cm} | %m
p{1.8cm} | %m
p{3.0cm} | c | c |} \hline
%   &              &\hfil  &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
Number as- &\hfil Section &\hfil Section  title     &                  &    &           \\%[-1mm]
signed to va-       &\hfil title   &\hfil(translated&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR & PR-reduce \\%[-1mm]
luable page  &\hfil(Russian)&\hfil to    English)    &                  &    &           \\%[-1mm]
%      &              &  &                  &    &           \\
\hline
no num   & с~            & Web feed       & /ru/rss.php/     & 0.09508 & 0.06677\\
\hline
1        & Главная       & Main           & /ru/             & 0.01537 & 0.013934\\
\hline
no num   & Разное        & Other          & /ru/misc/        & 0.01284 & delete\\
\hline
no num & Фотоальбом & Photo gallery & /ru/misc/album/2015/ & 0.00792 & delete\\
\hline
no num & Фотоальбом & Photo gallery & /ru/misc/album/2010/ & 0.00792 & delete\\
\hline
...& ...& ...& ...& ...& ...\\
\hline
5  & Наука & Science & /ru/research/ & 0.00296 & 0.005513\\
\hline
3  & Структура & Structure & /ru/structure/ & 0.00249 & 0.005513\\
\hline
...& ...& ...& ...& ...& ...\\
\hline
2  & Информация & Information & /ru/info/ & 0.00245 & 0.006772\\
\hline
4  & Образование & Education & /ru/education/ & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
\hline
6  & Поступающим & Admission & /ru/admission/r.html & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
\hline
9 & Выпускникам & For alumni & /ru/alumni/ & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
\hline
8 & Преподавателям & For teachers & /ru/forstaff.html & 0.00018 & 0.005513\\
\hline
7 & Студентам & For students & /ru/forstudents.html & 0.00018 & 0.005513\\
\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}\vspace{-3mm}
\end{table}


%\begin{table}[h]\footnotesize\baselineskip=1.6ex
%\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.25}
%\renewcommand{\tabcolsep}{1.2mm}
%\begin{center}\begin{tabular}{| c | m{2.5cm} |m{2.5cm} | m{3.4cm} | c | c |}
%\hline
%Number    &              &\hfil Section   &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%assigned  &\hfil Section &\hfil title     &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%to        &\hfil title   &\hfil(translated&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR & PR-reduce \\[-1mm]
%valuable  &\hfil(Russian)&\hfil to    English)    &                  &    &           \\[-1mm]
%page      &              &  &                  &    &           \\
%\hline
%no num   & с~            & Web feed       & /ru/rss.php/     & 0.09508 & 0.06677\\
%\hline
%1        & Главная       & Main           & /ru/             & 0.01537 & 0.013934\\
%\hline
%no num   & Разное        & Other          & /ru/misc/        & 0.01284 & delete\\
%\hline
%no num & Фотоальбом & Photo gallery & /ru/misc/album/2015/ & 0.00792 & delete\\
%\hline
%no num & Фотоальбом & Photo gallery & /ru/misc/album/2010/ & 0.00792 & delete\\
%\hline
%...& ...& ...& ...& ...& ...\\
%\hline
%5  & Наука & Science & /ru/research/ & 0.00296 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%3  & Структура & Structure & /ru/structure/ & 0.00249 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%...& ...& ...& ...& ...& ...\\
%\hline
%2  & Информация & Information & /ru/info/ & 0.00245 & 0.006772\\
%\hline
%4  & Образование & Education & /ru/education/ & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%6  & Поступающим & Admission & /ru/admission/r.html & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%9 & Выпускникам & For alumni & /ru/alumni/ & 0.00245 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%8 & Преподавателям & For teachers & /ru/forstaff.html & 0.00018 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%7 & Студентам & For students & /ru/forstudents.html & 0.00018 & 0.005513\\
%\hline
%\end{tabular}\end{center}
%\end{table}
%\end{center}



Naturally, it can be assumed that ``deletion'' or ``removal''
actually means that the directory being deleted must be
transformed into an independent site, for example,
http://other.\-apmath.spbu.ru, while retaining the hyperlinks
linking it to the parent site apmath. spbu.ru

The reduced graph contains 1.898 nodes and 14.4373 arcs. Its
PR-reduce values are computed and placed in the sixth column of
Table 3.

As a~result, the position of valuable pages is significantly
improved: the homepage now ranks first, the ``Information'' page
is second, then all the other valuable pages follow, skipping only
the ``Web feed'' page.

%\newpage



%\smallskip

\emph{\textbf{4.3. Website of the College of Computer,
Mathematical, and Natural Sciences, University of Maryland, USA.}}
The upper part of the homepage of the CMNS website is shown in
Figure~6. The valuable sections are numbered and highlighted with
ovals.




%\begin{center}
%\includegraphics[width=\textwidth,height=0.5\textwidth]{Figure6.eps}
%
%\vspace*{2mm}
%
%\small{\emph{Figure~6.} Part of the homepage of the CMNS website
%cmns.umd.edu}
%\end{center}

As can be seen from Table 4, the valuable pages of the site occupy
nine first positions. %\noindent
From this, it can be concluded
that the criterion for the correctness of the site structure is
not violated and no control actions are required.


\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table 4.} {\bf Details of the pages of the CMNS site with the
highest PR values}%

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{| c | %m
p{2.5cm} | %m
p{5.0cm} | c |}%
\hline
%   &                    &                  &    \\[-1mm]
Number as- &                    &                  &    \\[-.3mm]
signed to va-       &\hfil{Section title}&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR \\[-0.3mm]
luable page &                    &                  &    \\%[-1mm]
%      &                    &                  &    \\
\hline
1 & Main & / & 0.0448\\
\hline
2 & About CMNS & /about-cmns & 0.0458\\
\hline
3 & Departments & /departments & 0.0458\\
\hline
4 & Research & /research & 0.0458\\
\hline
5 & News\&Events & /news-events/news & 0.0458\\
\hline
6 & Undergraduate & /undergraduate & 0.0458\\
\hline
7 & Graduate & /graduate & 0.0458\\
\hline
8 & Alumni\&friends & /alumni-friends & 0.0458\\
\hline
9 & Faculty\&staff & /faculty-staff & 0.0458\\
\hline
no num & Odyssey Magazine & /news-events/news/odyssey-magazine & 0.0458\\
\hline
no num & Contact Us  & /contact-us & 0.0458\\
\hline
no num & Careers\&Recruiting & /careers-recruiting & 0.0458\\
\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}\vspace{-3mm}
\end{table}



\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig6}

\vskip 4mm {\small{\it Figure 6.} Part of the homepage of the CMNS
website cmns.umd.edu} }
\end{figure}


%\begin{center}
%\emph{Table 4.} \textbf{Details of the pages of the CMNS site with
%the highest PR values}
%
%\vspace*{-1mm}
%
%\begin{table}[h]\footnotesize\baselineskip=1.6ex
%\renewcommand{\arraystretch}{1.25}
%\renewcommand{\tabcolsep}{1.2mm}
%\begin{center}\begin{tabular}{| c | m{3.2cm} | m{7.0cm} | c |}
%\hline
%Number    &                    &                  &    \\[-1mm]
%assigned  &                    &                  &    \\[-1mm]
%to        &\hfil{Section title}&\hfil{Webpage URL}& PR \\[-1mm]
%valuable  &                    &                  &    \\[-1mm]
%page      &                    &                  &    \\
%\hline
%1 & Main & / & 0.0448\\
%\hline
%2 & About CMNS & /about-cmns & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%3 & Departments & /departments & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%4 & Research & /research & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%5 & News\&Events & /news-events/news & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%6 & Undergraduate & /undergraduate & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%7 & Graduate & /graduate & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%8 & Alumni\&friends & /alumni-friends & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%9 & Faculty\&staff & /faculty-staff & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%no num & Odyssey Magazine & /news-events/news/odyssey-magazine & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%no num & Contact Us  & /contact-us & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%no num & Careers\&Recruiting & /careers-recruiting & 0.0458\\
%\hline
%\end{tabular}\end{center}
%\end{table}
%\end{center}


%\smallskip

\textbf{5. Discussion and recommendations.} Based on experiments
carried out, some conclu\-sions were arrived at and
recommendations were made.

The FOE website is still at the initial stage of development. The
website has a~number of pages that are not currently maintained.
Such pages ought to be removed from the site. A preliminary plan
for boosting the website structure should be developed. The plan
should include converting some sections of this site into
standalone (independent) sites, especially if such sections have
sub-sections.

The structure of the AMCP website requires radical changes. First,
the ``Other'' section is unrelated to academic activities, but is
apparently important for the activities of the faculty. Therefore,
it can be reorganized into an independent site. Then, as in the
case above, a~plan for reorganizing certain sections into
independent sites should be developed.

Reorganizing certain sections into independent sites is aimed at
ensuring that valuable pages (that can be accessed directly from
the homepage) have the highest significance (PageRank) among all
the pages of the site. This is achieved by separating into
independent sites those sections whose root pages have high
PageRank, but are not considered as being valuable pages by the
site developer. If the developer had considered them as valuable
pages, he would have placed links pointing to them from the
homepage (i.~e. such pages would have had direct access from the
homepage of the site). The CMNS website seems to be
a~well-balanced and structured site and does not require major
control actions.

%\smallskip

\textbf{6. Conclusion.} A~formalized procedure for website
analysis was described. With a~graph-theoretic model, this
procedure allowed to examine the structure of a~website, evaluate
the PageRank values of its pages, and model the effects of control
actions~--- removal of individual localized components from the
site.

Step-by-step execution of the procedure was demonstrated in
real-life examples: the website of the Faculty of Engineering,
University of Nigeria, Nsukka, the website of the Faculty of
Applied Mathematics and Control Processes, Saint~Pe\-ters\-burg
State University, Russian Federation, and the website of the
College of Computer, Mathematical, and Na\-tural Sciences,
University of Maryland, USA. Based on the modeled effects of
control ac-\linebreak tions, the authors provide guidelines on how
to alter site structure in order to enhance it.\pagebreak

Experiments revealed that the structures of the FOE and AMCP
websites need some changes. It was established that the CMNS
website does not require such changes because its structure meets
the proposed criterion.

It was found that lack of clearly defined regulations and
development plans is one of the major obstacles towards
formalizing an efficient decision-making model for a~website
structure.

This paper has clearly demonstrated that the proposed method has
a~high level of generality. It can be a~vital tool in exploring
many other academic websites.

Another benefit of the proposed approach is that any free
graph/network software license, such as exploration software
Gephi, can be used by a~researcher to collect, analyze, process
and visualize webometrics data with regards to similar research.
Consequently, the proposed approach has a~very wide range of potential users.\\


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
%\newpage
\input{04/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи
%
%\newpage
\input{04/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи
%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%
{\footnotesize
%
%\thispagestyle{empty}
%
\vskip 3mm
%
\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %
%
}
