

\noindent{\small UDC 517.929.4  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 74G55

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Stabilization of weak solutions of parabolic systems \\
with distributed parameters on the graph%$^{*}$%
 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it  A.~P.~Zhabko$\,^1$%
, V.~V.~Provotorov$\,^2$%
, O.~R.~Balaban$\,^3$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%

}

\efootnote{
%%
%\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ The work of E.~M.~Parilina is supported by
%Russian Science Foundation (project N~17-11-01079).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University,
7--9, Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
Voronezh~State~University,~1,~Universitetskaya~pl.,~Voronezh,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
394006, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^3$~%
Air~Force~Academy~named~after~professor~N.~E.~Zhukovsky~and~Y.~A.~Gagarin,


\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
54a,~ul.~Starikh~Bol'shevikov, Voronezh,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
396064, Russian Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:}
Zhabko~A.~P.,~Provotorov~V.~V.,~Balaban~O.~R. Stabilization of
weak solutions of parabolic systems with distributed parameters on
the graph. {\it Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied
Mathematics. Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear,
vol.~15, iss.~\issuenum, pp.~\pageref{p3}--\pageref{p3e}.
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum03

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent In many applications because of the
complexity of the mathematical models have to abandon the use of
ordinary differential equations in behalf of considering the
evolutionary equations with partial derivatives.  In addition,
most commonly the evolutionary problem study on the finite
interval changes of a temporary variable. In practice, where you
can solve the problem for arbitrary finite interval changes to a
temporary variable it is important to know the behavior of the
solution where, when the temporary variable strives to infinity.
First of all, this is related to the study of the properties of
the stability of the indicated solution and the possibility of
constructing the stabilizing control in case of the instability.
Precisely this case is the object of the study in this work, in
which represent the analysis of the stability of the weak
solutions of the evolutionary systems with distributed parameters
on the graph with the unlimited growth of the temporary variable,
obtain the conditions of the stabilization of the weak solutions.
By studying the relevant initial-boundary value problem, we to be
beyond the scope of the classical solutions and appeal to the weak
solutions of the problem, reflecting more accurately the physical
essence of appearance and processes (i.~e. consider the
initial-boundary value problem in weak formulation). In this case,
the choice of the class of weak solutions to be determined one way
or the other functional space is at the disposal of the
researchers and to meet the demand, above all, conservation of the
existence theorems and the uniqueness theorems for the arbitrary
finite interval changes to a temporary variable. The fundamental
used tool is the representation of a weak solution in the form of
a  functional series (method Faedo---Galerkin approximation with
the special basis-system functions~--- the eigenfunction system)
and the compactness of a many of approximate solutions (thanks to a priori estimates).\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: an evolutionary system of parabolic type,
distributed parameters on the graph, a weak solution,
stabilization of a weak solution.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


\textbf{Introduction.} Today have a lot of the results by analyze
of the behavior of the solutions of the differential equations
(the equations systems)  to infinity, but, as we know, all they
oriented of the ordinary differential equations and systems [1,
2]. In many applications because of the complexity of the
mathematical models have abandon to these differential systems in
behalf of considering the evolutionary equations with partial
derivatives. Precisely this case is the subject of study in this
work: make attempt to analyze of the possibility of the
stabilization solutions for the evolutionary systems with
distributed parameters on the graph. By studying the relevant
initial-boundary value problem, we to by beyond the scope a
classical solutions and reduce to the weak solutions of the
problem (i.~e. consider the initial-boundary value problem in weak
formulation). These solutions describe more exactly the physical
essence of phenomena and processes. In this case, the choice of
the class of weak solutions to be determined one way or the other
functional space, to meet the demand, above all, conservation of
the existence theorems and the uniqueness theorems for the
arbitrary finite interval changes to a temporary variable
(provided that correspond to the spirit of the study phenomenon or
processes).  The fundamental used tool is the representation of a
weak solution in the form of a  functional series (method
Faedo---Galerkin approximation with the special basis-system
functions~--- the eigenfunction system) and the compactness of a
many of approximate solutions (thanks to a priori estimates).






\textbf{Basic concepts and notation.} In the paper considers the
question of stabilizing the weak solving of the problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 \frac{\partial u(x,t)}{\partial t}+\mathbb{A}u=f(x,t),\quad u(x,0)=\varphi(x),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
when $t\rightarrow \infty$ for the evolutionary system of
parabolic equations with distributed parameters on the graph
$\Gamma$ (in the applications~--- on the network) [3--6] (for
hyperbolic systems see the paper  [7]) and what role is played by
the operator $\mathbb{A}$. In here $\mathbb{A}$ is the positive
definite operator with discrete spectrum, acting in a Hilbert
space $H$, $f(x,t)$ and $u(x,t)$ are the specified and search
abstract functions with values in the same space $H$ (the map
$t\rightarrow H$),  $\varphi(x)$ is the element of the space
$L_2(\Gamma)$. Weak solution (1) is defined as the map
$t\rightarrow H$, satisfying a  integral identity  [5, 6]. In
particular get the conditions, fulfill under which a weak solution
of problem (1) converges for  $t\rightarrow \infty$ in norm $H$ to
a some weak solution $v\in W\subset H$ of problem
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \mathbb{A}v=g,\quad g\in H.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}





We introduce the following concepts and symbols adopted in the works [5, 6]: %\\

-- $\Gamma$ is the limited oriented geometric graph with edges  $\gamma$, parameterized the seg\-ment~$[0,1]$; %\\

-- $\partial\Gamma$ and $J(\Gamma)$ are the many of boundary  $\zeta$ and internal  $\xi$ nodes of graph  respectively; %\\

-- $\Gamma_0$ is the join of all the edges of the graph  $\Gamma$, does not contain the endpoints; %\\

-- $\Gamma_{t}=\Gamma_0\times(0,t)$
($\gamma_{t}=\gamma_0\times(0,t)$), $\partial \Gamma_{t}=\partial
\Gamma\times(0,t)$ ($t\in(0,T]$, $T<\infty$).

All through of the work make use of the classic space of functions: %\\

-- $L_{p}(\Gamma)$ ($p=1,2$) is a Banach space of measurable functions on  $\Gamma_0$, integrable with degree of order $p$ (similarly defined the space  $L_{p}(\Gamma_T)$); %\\

-- $L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})$ is the space of functions from
$L_1(\Gamma_{T})$,
$\|u\|_{L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})}=\int\limits_0^T(\int\limits_{\Gamma}u^2dx)^{\frac{1}{2}}dt$.

As well we make use of the analogues of Sobolev spaces  [8, 9]: %\\

-- $W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)$ is the space of functions from  $L_{2}(\Gamma)$, with generalized derivative of order  $1$ also from  $L_{2}(\Gamma)$; %\\

-- $W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ is the space of functions from  $L_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$ with generalized derivative of order~1 for $x$  belonging to space  $L_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$ (similarly defined the space  $W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma_{T}))$; %\\

-- $V_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$ is the set of all functions  $u(x,t)\in
W_{2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ with finite norm
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|u\|_{2,\Gamma_{T}}\equiv
\mathop{\max}\limits_{0\leq t\leq
T}\left\|u(\cdot,t)\right\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\left\|u_x\right\|_{L_2(\Gamma_{T})},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
these functions are continuous on  $t$ in norm space
$L_{2}(\Gamma)$.



We will introduce the state space of parabolic system and the
auxiliary space. Consider the bilinear form
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell(\mu,\nu)=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{d \mu(x)}{d
x}\frac{d \nu(x)}{d x}+b(x)\mu(x)\nu(x)\right)dx
 \end{array} }}
\]
with a fixed measurable and limited on  $\Gamma_0$ functions
$a(x)$, $b(x)$ square integrable.

If the function  $u(x)\in W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$
и~$\ell(u,\nu)-\int\limits_{\Gamma}f(x)\nu(x)dx=0$ for any
$\nu(x)\in W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ ($f(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$ is the fixed
function), then (lemma 2 in [10, p. 92])  for any edge
$\gamma\subset\Gamma$ the narrowing of the function
$a(x)_\gamma\frac{du(x)_\gamma}{dx}$ continuously in the endpoints
of the edge $\gamma$. Relabel $\Omega_a(\Gamma)$ the many of these
functions $u(x)$ satisfying the ratios $\sum\limits_{\gamma\in
R(\xi)}a(1)_\gamma\frac{du (1)_\gamma}{dx}
 =\sum\limits_{\gamma\in r(\xi)}a(0)_\gamma\frac{du (0)_\gamma}{dx}$
in all nodes  $\xi\in J(\Gamma)$ (in here  $R(\xi)$ and $r(\xi)$
is the sets of the edges  $\gamma$ accordingly oriented  ``to node
$\xi$'' and ``from node  $\xi$'') and $u(x)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0$.
The closing of the set  $\Omega_a(\Gamma)$  in norm
$W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$  relabel $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$.

Let the next  $\Omega_a(\Gamma_{T})$ are the set of functions
$u(x,t)\in V_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$, whose traces are defined in
sections of the domain  $\Gamma_{T}$ the plane  $t=t_0$ ($t_0\in
[0,T]$) as a function of class  $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ and satisfy
a ratios
\begin{equation}\label{eq3}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \sum\limits_{\gamma\in
R(\xi)}a(1)_\gamma\frac{\partial u(1,t)_\gamma}{\partial x}
=\sum\limits_{\gamma\in r(\xi)}a(0)_\gamma\frac{\partial
u(0,t)_\gamma}{\partial x}
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for all nodes  $\xi\in J(\Gamma)$. The closing of the set
$\Omega_a(\Gamma_{T})$ in norm  (3)  relabel
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$; it is clear that
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})\subset W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$.


Another the subspace of the space  $ W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ is
$W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, i.~e. is the closing in norm
$W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma_{T})$ the set of differentiable on $\Gamma_0$
functions $u(x,t)$ satisfy a ratios  (4) for all nodes  $\xi\in
J(\Gamma)$ and boundary condition  $u(x,t)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0$
for any  $t\in [0,T]$ (the derivatives in the nodes are defined as
the one-sided derivative).

\textbf{Remark  1.} The space  $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ describes
the states set of parabolic system  (1), $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ is
the auxiliary space; $H=L_2(\Gamma)$, $W=W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$,
$\mathbb{A}y=-\frac{d}{dx }\left(a(x)\frac{dy(x)}{d
x}\right)+b(x)y(x)$.


\

In the space    $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ considered the parabolic
equation
\begin{equation}\label{eq5}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 \frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial t}-\frac{\partial }{\partial x }\left(a(x)\frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial x}\right)+b(x)y(x,t)=f(x,t),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
represents a system of differential equations with distributed
parameters on each edge  $\gamma$ of the graph  $\Gamma$;
$f(x,t)\in L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})$. The state  $y(x,t)$
$(x,t\in\overline{\Gamma}_{T})$  of the system  (5) in the domain
$\overline{\Gamma}_{T}$ is determined by a weak solution  $y(x,t)$
of the equation  (5), satisfying the initial and boundary
conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq6}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y\mid_{t=0}=\varphi(x),\quad x\in\Gamma,
\quad y\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_T}=0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
$\varphi(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$. The assumptions about the functions
$a(x)$ and $b(x)$ to make mention above. From $y(x,t)\in
V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ should be noted, that the map
$y:[0,T]\rightarrow W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)\subset L_2(\Gamma)$ is a
continuous function, so that the first equality  (6) makes sense
and is be understood almost everywhere.




\textbf{Definition.}  \emph{A weak solution of the
initial-boundary value problem} (5), (6) \emph{is the func\-tion
$y(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, that satisfies an integral
identity}
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \int\limits_{\Gamma}y(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dx-\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}y(x,t)\frac{\partial
\eta(x,t)}{\partial t}dxdt+\ell_{t}(y,\eta)=
\\
=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\varphi(x)\eta(x,0)dx+\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}f(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dxdt
 \end{array} }}
\]
\emph{for any function  $\eta(x,t)\in W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ and for
any  $t\in[0,T]$}.


\textbf{The necessary approval.} Let's give the necessary
approval, the full proof which are presented in the works  [3--6].



In proving solvability the problem (5), (6) in the space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ make use a special basis of space
$W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$~--- the system of generalized eigenfunctions
of boundary-value problem on the eigenvalues (the spectral
problem)
\begin{equation}\label{eq8}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
-\frac{d}{dx}\left(a(x)\frac{du(x)}{dx}\right)+b(x)u(x)=\lambda
u(x),\,\,\,u(x)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
in the classroom $W^1(a,\Gamma)$ [10, p. 106; 11]. This problem
consists in finding many such numbers $\lambda$ (the eigenvalues
of the boundary value problem  (7)), each of which corresponds to
at least one nontrivial generalized solution $u(x)\in
W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ (the generalized eigenfunctions), satisfies
the integral identity
\begin{equation}\label{eq8}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \ell(u,\eta)=\lambda\,(u,\eta)
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any function  $\eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ (here and
everywhere below through $\left(\cdot,\cdot\right)$ designated the
scalar product in  $L_{\,2}(\Gamma)$  or $L_{\,2}(\Gamma_T)$).

Install the necessary further the properties of eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the generalized spectral problem  (7).  To do
this, we will introduce in the space  $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ of
new the scalar product
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
[u,v]=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{d u(x)}{d x}\frac{d
v(x)}{d
x}+(\lambda_0+b(x))u(x)v(x)\right)dx=\ell(u,v)+\lambda_0(u,v),
\end{array} }}
\]
where the number  $\lambda_0$ of determined inequality
$\lambda_0>\beta$ (here the constant $\beta$ fixed the condition
of the restriction to functions $b(x)$: $|b(x)|\leq \beta$). Then
given  (2) true the ratio
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [u,v]\geq a_{*}\|\frac{d u}{d
x}\|^2+(\lambda_0-\beta)\|\frac{d v}{d x}\|^2\geq \alpha(\|\frac{d
u}{d x}\|^2+\|\frac{d v}{d x}\|^2),
\end{array} }}
\]
$\alpha>0$ is the fixed constant.  The latter means equivalence of
norms  $\|u\|_{[\cdot,\cdot]}=\sqrt{[u,u]}$   created by the
scalar product $[\cdot,\cdot]$ and the norm
$\|u\|_{W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)}$ of space  $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$.
The generalized eigenfunctions of the spectral problem  (7)
satisfy the integral identity
\begin{equation}\label{eq8}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [u,\eta]=(\lambda_0+\lambda)(u,\eta)
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any function  $\eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$.

In the space  $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ we define the operator  $B$
by using identities

\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [Bu,\eta]=(u,\eta)\quad \forall \eta(x)\in
W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma),
\end{array} }}
\]
after which the identity  (9) is equivalent to
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [Bu,\eta]=\tilde{\lambda}[u,\eta]\quad
\forall \eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma),
\end{array} }}
\]
where $\tilde{\lambda}=1/(\lambda_0+\lambda)$. It is easy to
verify that the operator $B$ is completely continuous,
self-adjoint and positive operator. Whence it follows that his the
eigenvalues  $\{\tilde{\lambda}_i\}_{i\geq 1}$ are real, positive
and situated in the decrease order, taking into account their
multiplicity, moreover  $\tilde{\lambda}_i\rightarrow 0$ under
$i\rightarrow \infty$. Note that the point  $\tilde{\lambda}=0$ is
not its eigenvalue, because under  $\tilde{\lambda}=0$ from the
definition of the operator  $B$ it should by $u=0$. The
generalized eigenfunctions  $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$, relating to
the eigenvalues $\{\tilde{\lambda}_i\}_{i\geq 1}$, are real and
mutually orthogonal: $[u_i,u_j]=0$ under $i\neq j$. In view of the
foregoing, the system of generalized eigenfunctions
$\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ form a basis in space
$W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$, as well  $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ dense in
$L_2(\Gamma)$, then $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ is the basis in
$L_2(\Gamma)$ ($\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ is the orthonormal basis in
$L_2(\Gamma)$). Given the apparent relationship
$\lambda_i=-\lambda_0+{1/\tilde{\lambda}_i}$ of the eigenvalues
$\lambda_i$ of the spectral problem  (7) and the eigenvalues
$\tilde{\lambda}_i$ of the operator  $B$, as well as the match of
the generalized eigenfunctions, come to the next approval.





\textbf{Theorem 1.}  \emph{Let }  $0<a_\ast\leq a(x)\leq
a^\ast,\,\,|b(x)|\leq \beta$, $x\in \Gamma_0$. \emph{Then the
spectral problem} (7) \emph{has counted many the real eigenvalues
$\{\lambda_i\}_{i\geq 1}$} (\emph{situated in the ascending
order, taking into account their multiplicity}), \emph{moreover
$\lambda_i\rightarrow \infty$ under  $i\rightarrow \infty$}
(\emph{the eigenvalues $\lambda_i$ are positive, except maybe for
a finite number of the first}). \emph{System of the generalized
eigenfunctions $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ form a basis in
$W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ and  $L_2(\Gamma)$. The generalized
eigenfunctions orthonormalized in  $L_2(\Gamma)$   and orthogonal
in terms of the scalar product $[\cdot,\cdot]$.}




\textbf{Remark 2.} If $0\leq b(x)\leq\beta$, as is usually the
case in the applications, then all eigenvalues of the spectral
problem (7) is positive with limit point at infinity. Indeed, this
follows from the integral identities (8), when $u=\eta=u_i(x)$,
$\lambda=\lambda_i$  and a chain of equalities
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell(u_i,u_i)=\lambda_i(u_i,u_i)=\lambda_i\|u_i\|^2=\lambda_i
\end{array} }}
\]
for $i=1,2,...$ (see also [9, p. 98]). The positiveness of the
eigenvalues is the determining factor for establishing the
stability condition and the possibility of the stabilizing of
evolutionary systems of parabolic equations with distributed
parameters on the graph.





\textbf{Remark 3.}  The operator  $\mathbb{A}$ is the symmetric
positive definite operator with discrete spectrum and operating in
the space $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)\subset L_2(\Gamma)$ with the
values in $L_2(\Gamma)$. The domain of definition is the set
$\Omega_a(\Gamma)$, dense in the space $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$.


A direct consequence arising from remarks 2 and 3 is (see [10, p.
105])

\textbf{Theorem 2.} \emph{ The problem }
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\mathbb{A}v\equiv-\frac{d}{dx}\left(a(x)\frac{du(x)}{dx}\right)+b(x)u(x)=g,\,\,\,
g\in L_2(\Gamma),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\emph{has a unique weak solution in space }
$W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$.



\textbf{Theorem 3.} \emph{When any  $f(x)\in L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$,
$\varphi(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$ and for any  $0<T<\infty$ the
initial-boundary value problem} (5), (6) \emph{has a unique weak
solution in the space  $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$.}

Under  proof of the conclusion of theorem 3 make use of the
Faedo---Galerkin method with the basis $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$
(theorem 1).  A detailed proof represent in the work [12].

For simplicity, the further statement of change space
$L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, replacing this space on
$CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)\subset L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$
($CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$ is the space of functions from
$L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, that are continuous on  $t$ in the norm
$L_{2}(\Gamma)$), when this $f(x,t)\in CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$ (the
latter is easy condition in applications).  In this case, as shown
in the work  [12], the weak solution  $y(x,t)\in
V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ of problem  (5), (6) for any  $0<T<\infty$
representable in the form of the series
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(x,t) =\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\left(\varphi_i e^{-\lambda_it}+\int\limits_0^t
f_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)u_i(x),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where   $\varphi(x)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty \varphi_i u_i(x)$;
$\varphi_i=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\varphi(x)u_i(x)dx$;
$f(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty f_i(t)u_i(x)$;
$f_i(t)=\int\limits_{\Gamma}f(x,t)u_i(x)dx$,\quad$t\in[0,T]$.





\

In many applications, particularly, when studying conditions
stabilize,  where investigate the properties of solutions
$y(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ of the problem (5), (6) for an
arbitrary finite  $T$, it is important to know  ${y}(x,t)$ when
$t\rightarrow +\infty$. To do this, let's consider a simple and
unobtrusive enough condition for the existence in the domain
$\Gamma_\infty=\Gamma_0\times[0,\infty)$ of the free member
$f(x,t)$ of the equation  (5) [12]. Namely, let any  $T$, just as
above, $f(x,t)\in CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, with
\begin{equation}\label{eq12}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
A
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any  $t\geq 0$, $A$ is the fixed constant  (the ratio (12)
indicates that the function  $f(x,t)$ is defined and limited in
the domain  $\Gamma_\infty$).



\textbf{Remark 4.} To improve the properties of the function
$f(x,t)$ on a variable  $t$ level of smoothness of weak solutions
$y(x,t)$ on $t>0$ (see remark 3 in the work [12]).

Indeed, let  $f(x,t)\in C^{(1)}((0,\infty); L_2(\Gamma))$ (in here
$C^{(1)}((0,\infty); L_2(\Gamma))$ is the maps space  $f(x,t)$
from the variable $t$ with values in  $L_2(\Gamma)$, $f_t(x,t)\in
L_2(\Gamma)$ for any  $t\in(0,\infty)$). The series
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} {y}_t(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\left(-\lambda_i\varphi_i
e^{-\lambda_it}+f_i(t)-\lambda_i\int\limits_0^t
f_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)u_i(x),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
received of differentiation (11) on  $t$, converge in metric
$L_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ uniformly along  $t$ in any segment $[t_0,T]$,
$0<t_0<T<\infty$. Indeed, if we take the integral by parts, we get
the series with coefficients
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} -\lambda_i\varphi_i
e^{-\lambda_it}+f_i(0)e^{-\lambda_it}+\int\limits_0^t
f'_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Evaluate these coefficients. Given the inequality of Cauchy,
square coefficient, when random  $i$ at is does not exceed the
magnitude of
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} 3\varphi_i^2\left(\lambda_i
e^{-\lambda_it}\right)^2+3f^2_i(0)e^{-2\lambda_it}+3\left(\int\limits_0^t
f'_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)^2\leq
\\
\leq
\frac{3}{{t_0}^2}\varphi_i^2+3f^2_i(0)+\frac{3}{2\lambda_i}\int\limits_0^T
[f'_i(\tau)]^2d\tau
 \end{array} }}
\]
for any  $T\in(t_0,\infty)$. On the assumptions about the
functions $\varphi(x)$ and $f(x,t)$ should that a series with a
total member of
$\frac{3}{{t_0}^2}\varphi_i^2+3f^2_i(0)+\frac{3}{2\lambda_i}\int\limits_0^T
[f'_i(\tau)]^2d\tau$ converge,  and it means that a series (13)
converges uniformly on the metric $L_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ in any segment
$[t_0,T]$, $0<t_0<T<\infty$. From this assertion should be the sum
$y(x,t)$ of the series  (11) belongs to the space
$C^{(1)}((0,\infty); W^1(a,\Gamma))$.

%\

\textbf{Theorem 4.} \emph{Let ${y}(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_T)$ is
a weak solution of problem }(5), (6) \emph{for an arbitrary  $T>0$
which $f(x,t)$, satisfies the condition} (12). \emph{Then there is
such positive constant  $C$,  that}
$\|y(\cdot,t))\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq C$ \emph{when  }$t\rightarrow
+\infty$.

{P~r~o~o~f.} Split semiaxis $[0,\infty)$ into sections $[j-1,j]$,
$j=1,2,...$,\, and relabel $t_{j}$ a number belonging to
$[j-1,j]$, for which
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma_T)}=\mathop{\max}\limits_{t\in[j-1,j]}\|y(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma_T)},
\quad j=1,2,...\,.
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}

For arbitrary positive  $s$ and  $t$ ($s<t$) from the integral
identities of the define of weak problem solving (5), (6) should
the ratio
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \int\limits_s^t \left(\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial t},y(x,t)
\right)dt+\int\limits_s^t\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial x}\frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial
x}+b(x)y(x,t)y(x,t)\right)dxdt=
\\
=\int\limits_s^t(f(x,t),y(x,t))dt,
 \end{array} }}
\]
if you put  $\eta(x,t)=y(x,t)$ (ipso the remark 4 of theorem 3 the
function   $y(x,t)$ differentiable along  $t$,  $\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial t}\in L_2(\Gamma_T)$). Of this ratio is obtained
the inequality
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}-\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,s)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+
\alpha\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\\
\leq\left(\int\limits_s^t\|f(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}dt\right)^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where  the  positive constant  $\alpha$ depends only on fixed
$a_*$ and $\beta_*$ (see the condition of theorem~1 and remark~2).

Further reasoning relies on the idea presented in the monograph by
J.-L. Lions  [13, p.~519]: use the inequality (15) for an
arbitrary segment  $[t_j, t_{j+2}]$, $j=1,2,...$, because when
condition (14) makes it possible the equality  $t_j=t_{j+1}$.

We show that for any $j=1,2,...$
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\max\{\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}, M\},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where
$M=\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{6A}{\alpha}\right)^{1/2}$;
$\chi$ is the inclusive constant the space $W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ in
$L_2(\Gamma)$.

1. Let $\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}$, then the proof is complete.

2. Suppose that
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}>
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
By virtue of (15) for  $s=t_j$, $t=t_{j+2}$ true the inequality
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\alpha\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\\
\leq
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_j)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
whence, comparing (17) to (18) it should be
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\alpha\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}<
\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
Taking into account $t_{j+2}-t_j\leq 3$ and the ratio
$\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
A$,  we obtain
$\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
3A$ and the evaluation (19) takes a resultant form
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma<
\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Since  $t_{j+2}-t_j\geq1$, then exist $\tau\in [t_j, t_{j+2}]$
such that
$\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma=
(t_{j+2}-t_j)\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}\geq\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}$,
it means, from the evaluation (20) it should be
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,\tau)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\chi\sqrt{\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}


Let right how  $s=\tau$, $t=t_{j+2}$ in the ratio (15), then using
(20), come to the inequality
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+
\left(3A\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\]
or, taking into account (21),
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq\frac{1}{2}\left(\chi\sqrt{\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}}\right)^2+
\left(3A\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\right)^{1/2}=\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{3A}{\alpha},
\end{array} }}
\]
or
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
M^2=\frac{6A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{6A}{\alpha}.
\end{array} }}
\]
From here and the assumption (17) it should be (16) and further to
any $t>0$ the inequality $\|y(\cdot,t))\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\max\{\max\limits_{t\in[0,2]}\|y(\cdot,t)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}, M\}=C$
is correctly. Thus, the assertion of the theorem is proved,  the
solution $y(x,t)$ defined in domain
$\Gamma_\infty=\Gamma_0\times[0,\infty)$.

\textbf{Corollary. } \emph{In the conditions of theorems 3 and 4
the  initial-boundary value problem} (5), (6) \emph{is uniquely
weakly solvable in space  $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_\infty)$.}


\textbf{Remark 5.} The conditions of theorem 4 allow another of
importance fact.   Applying (15) to $(t,t+1)$, get the inequality
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\alpha\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\frac{1}{2}C^2 +A^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\]
from which should be the existence of a positive constant $C^*$\!
such that%\\
$\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\!
\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq$ $\leq
C^*$  for any  $t\geq 0$.


%\


\textbf{Stabilization of weak solution.}  Suppose that  $0\leq
b(x)\leq\beta$ for $x\in\Gamma_0$, then the eigenvalues
$\lambda_i$, $i\geq 1$, are positive (remark 2). Consider the
system (5) in the domain  $\Gamma_{\infty}$. The right side
$f(x,t)$ of the equation (5) is the distributed effect
$\upsilon(x,t)=f(x,t)$ on the evolutionary system  (5), (6). The
function $\upsilon(x,t)$ belong to the class $C^{(1)}((0,\infty);
L_2(\Gamma))$ and satisfy the conditions of the theorems 1--4.

Relabel $y(\upsilon;x,t)$ the weak solution of initial-boundary
value problem (5), (6) under the condition $f(x,t)=\upsilon(x,t)$.



\textbf{\emph{The problem of stabilize a weak solution.}} Solution
$y(\upsilon;x,t)$ of the system (5), (6) with the  initial state
$\varphi(x)$ using control effect $\upsilon(x,t)$ (further:
\emph{the stabilizing control}) is to definition  such the
conditions on the stabilizing control $\upsilon(x,t)$ and the
function $\theta(x)\in W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$, that weak solution
$y(\upsilon; x, t)$ of the initial-boundary value problem (5), (6)
strive  to $\theta(x)$ under $t\rightarrow \infty$ in norm of the
space  $L_2(\Gamma)$.



\textbf{Theorem 5.} \emph{Let the function  $\upsilon(x,t)$
strive  to  $g(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$ under $t\rightarrow \infty$ in
norm of the space $L_2(\Gamma)$ so that}
$\|\upsilon(t)-g\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\rightarrow 0$ \emph{under
$t\rightarrow\infty$ and} $\int\limits_0^\infty
\|\upsilon'(t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}dt < \infty$.

\emph{Then  weak solution $y(\upsilon;x,t)$ of the
initial-boundary value problem} (5), (6) \emph{strive to the weak
solution $\theta$ of the problem} (10) \emph{under $t\rightarrow
\infty$ in norm of the space $L_2(\Gamma)$.}







{P~r~o~o~f.}  First of all it should be noted that the weak
solution  $\theta(x)$ of the problem (10) is represented in the
form of
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \theta(x)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\frac{g_i }{\lambda_i}u_i(x),\quad g_i=(g,u_i).
 \end{array} }}
\]
Indeed,   $A\theta=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty g_i
u_i(x)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty (g,u_i) u_i(x)=g(x)$.  The weak
solution $y(\upsilon;x,t)$ of problem (5), (6) can be written as
$y(\upsilon;x,t)=y^I(\upsilon;x,t)+y^{II}(\upsilon;x,t)$, where is
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y^I(\upsilon;x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\varphi_i e^{-\lambda_it}u_i(x),
\\
y^{II}(\upsilon;x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon_i(\tau)d\tau u_i(x),\quad
\upsilon_i(\tau)=(\upsilon(\tau),u_i),
 \end{array} }}
\]
it means
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\upsilon;t)-\theta\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\|y^I(\upsilon;t)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\|y^{II}(\upsilon;t)-\theta\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Next, we have
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y^I(\upsilon;t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
(\varphi,u_i)^2 e^{-2\lambda_it}\leq
e^{-2\lambda_1t}\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
(\varphi,u_i)^2=e^{-2\lambda_1t}\|\varphi\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\rightarrow0,
\end{array} }}
\]
when $t\rightarrow\infty$;
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
y^{II}(\upsilon;x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda_i}\left(\upsilon_i(t)-e^{-\lambda_it}\upsilon_i(0)-\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)u_i(x),
 \end{array} }}
\]
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y^{II}(\upsilon;t)-\theta\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}
\left((\upsilon_i(t)-\theta_i)-e^{-\lambda_it}\upsilon_i(0)-\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Beginning with the Cauchy inequality, we get
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y^{II}(\upsilon;t)-\theta\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
3\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}(\upsilon_i(t)-\theta_i)^2\,+
\\
+\,3\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}e^{-2\lambda_it}\upsilon^2_i(0)+
3\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}\left(\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Hence, when $t\rightarrow\infty$
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}(\upsilon_i(t)-\theta_i)^2\leq
\frac{1}{\lambda^2_1}\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty(\upsilon_i(t)-\theta_i)^2=\frac{1}{\lambda^2_1}\|\upsilon(t)-g\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\rightarrow0,
\\
\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}e^{-2\lambda_it}\upsilon^2_i(0)\leq
\frac{1}{\lambda^2_1}e^{-2\lambda_1t}\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
e^{-2\lambda_it}\upsilon^2_i(0)\rightarrow0.
 \end{array} }}
\]
It remains to evaluate the series of
$\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}\left(\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2$.  Let
$t^*$ is a fixed number of interval $(0,t)$ such that
$\int\limits_{t^*}^\infty
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau<\epsilon\lambda^3_1/2$,
where $\epsilon$ is the arbitrarily given positive number. So as
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \left(\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2=
\left(\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau+\int\limits_{\varsigma}^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau\right)^2\leq
\\
\leq 2\left(\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau\right)^2+
2\left(\int\limits_{\varsigma}^{t}
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau\right)^2,
 \end{array} }}
\]
then, using the Cauchy---Schwartz inequality, we have
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \left(\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2\leq
 \frac{e^{-2\lambda_i(t-\varsigma)}-e^{-2\lambda_it}}{\lambda_i}\int\limits_0^{\varsigma} \upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau+\frac{1-e^{-2\lambda_i(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda_i}\int\limits_{\varsigma}^{t}\upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau<
\\
<\frac{e^{-2\lambda_1(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda_1}\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau+\frac{1}{\lambda_1}\int\limits_{\varsigma}^{\infty}\upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Whence, granting of
$\|\upsilon(t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\upsilon^2_i(t)$, get
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\frac{1}{\lambda^2_i}\left(\int\limits_0^t
e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}\upsilon'_i(\tau)d\tau \right)^2<
\frac{e^{-2\lambda_1(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda^3_1}\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau+\frac{1}{\lambda^3_1}\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty\int\limits_{\varsigma}^{\infty}\upsilon'^2_i(\tau)d\tau=
\\
=\frac{e^{-2\lambda_1(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda^3_1}\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau+\frac{1}{\lambda^3_1}\int\limits_{\varsigma}^{\infty}\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau<
\\
<\frac{e^{-2\lambda_1(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda^3_1}\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau+\frac{\epsilon}{2}.
 \end{array} }}
\]

By virtue of the convergence of integral  $\int\limits_0^{\infty}
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau$ (and thus limited
$\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau$ when
$\varsigma<\infty$) and when a sufficiently large $t_0$ correctly
the inequality
$\frac{e^{-2\lambda_1(t-\varsigma)}}{\lambda^3_1}\int\limits_0^{\varsigma}
\|\upsilon'(\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\tau<\frac{\epsilon}{2},\quad
t>t_0$, and hence the inequality
$\|y^{II}(\upsilon;t)-\theta\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\rightarrow0$. The
theorem is proved.



\textbf{Conclusion.} The approach presented the assertions of
theorems 3--5 it is possible  may make use under obtain the
conditions of stability (asymptotic stability) of the weak
solutions of initial-boundary value problem (5), (6). This same
approach can be applied to a problem in the direction of
increasing dimensionality as the spatial variable  $x$ ($x\in
\mathbb{R}^n$ and the functions describing the state of the
studied system   [14]). The obtained results are fundamental in
the problems of optimal control and stabilization of differential
systems with delay  [15--21].



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{03/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{03/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
