

\noindent{\small UDC 519.654+539.31  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~16.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 74S60

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Statistical criteria for the limits of application of Hooke's law%$^{*}$%

 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it  A. V. Orekhov%$\,^1$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%

}

\efootnote{
%%
%\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ This work was supported by the Russian
%Foundation for Basic Research (research project N
%20-07-00531).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
%$^2$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9, Universitetskaya nab.,
St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:} Orekhov A. V. Statistical
criteria for the limits of application of Hooke's law. {\it
Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied Mathematics.
Computer Science. Control Pro\-ces\-ses}, \issueyear, vol.~16,
iss.~\issuenum,
pp.~\pageref{p4}--\pageref{p4e}. %\\
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent Modern methods for studying the
stress-strain state of solids use graphical methods based
on\linebreak a stress-strain curve to determine the transition
from elastic deformation to plastic deformation. However, this
approach is not formal and it is intended only for when stress is
a function of strain in the one-dimensional case. Cases, when
strain is a function of the stress, are also of practical
importance. The purpose of the study is to develop formal rules
for determining the limits of applicability of Hooke's law. The
proposed analytical methods for determining the transition from
elastic deformation to plastic deformation are based on consistent
statistical sequential.  In this article, quadratic forms are
derived for calculating the point at which the type of an
increasing monotonous numerical sequence changes from linear to
non-linear type. With the help of these quadratic forms,
statistical criteria (approximation-estimation tests) are
constructed to determine the limits of applicability for Hooke's
law. These boundaries are defined as Markov moments. The novelty
of the results shows that it is possible to determine the yield
point without visualizing the experimental data. The numerical
example of the application of a parabolic approximation-estimation
test is provided. From the results of this experiment, it can be
concluded that the analytical determination of the limits of
applicability of Hooke's law coincides with a visual assessment.
Approximation-estimation tests provide an opportunity to determine
the limits of applicability of Hooke's law analytically.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: Hooke's law, stress, strain,
approximation-estimation test, least squares method, Markov
moments.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


{\bf {1.\,Introduction.}}\; The primary purpose of studying the
properties of materials when exposed to external forces is to
establish a relationship between stresses and strains.\linebreak
Sometimes displacements and deformations are determined by
stresses and forces, and sometimes vice versa, forces, and
stresses are determined by displacements and de\-for\-ma\-tions.
The purest form of such a dependence arises during elastic
deformations and is expressed by Hooke's law, which states that
stress is proportional to deformation~[1, 2].

For example, for uniaxial tension (compression) along the
$z$-axis, this law can be expressed by the simple \mbox{formula
$\sigma_z=E \varepsilon_z,$} where $\sigma_z$ is the longitudinal
stress, $\varepsilon_z$ is the relative elongation, $E$ is
proportionality coefficient. This coefficient is called Young's
modulus (for a fixed isotropic and homogeneous material, the
coefficient $E$ is a constant value). It is important to note that
during axial compression of the cylinder, in addition to
longitudinal shortening, transverse elongation occurs. However, in
the transverse direction, there is no stress. Therefore, the
one-dimensional form of Hooke's law generally cases insufficient.
Experimental studies have shown that under uniaxial stress in
solids, triaxial deformation occurs (except for individual cases
of anisotropy)~[3].

Transverse deformation under elastic tension (compression) is
characterized by the Poisson coefficient of $\nu$, which is equal
to the ratio of transverse and longitudinal deformation with the
opposite sign. Another important quantity is the shear modulus
$G$, which characterizes the material's ability to resist shear.
The following relationship determines the shear modulus:
$$ G=\frac{\tau}{\gamma},$$
where $\tau$ is the shear stress,\; $\gamma$ is shear deformation.
In a homogeneous isotropic material, the shear modulus is
connected with the Young's modulus through the Poisson's ratio:
$$G=\frac{E}{2(1+\nu)},$$
here $\nu$ is the value of the Poisson's ratio for a given
material~[1, 2].

The shear modulus, Young's modulus, and Poisson's ratio are
quantities characterizing the elastic properties of a material.
All of them are used in the generalized Hooke's law~[2]. For an
isotropic material, this law can be represented:
\begin{equation*}
\varepsilon_{x}=\frac{1}{E}\left[\sigma_{x}-\nu(\sigma_{y}+\sigma_{z})\right],
\qquad\gamma_{xy}=\frac{\tau_{xy}}{G}\;,
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\varepsilon_{y}=\frac{1}{E}\left[\sigma_{y}-{\nu}(\sigma_{z}+\sigma_{x})\right],
\qquad\gamma_{yz}=\frac{\tau_{yz}}{G}\;,
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\varepsilon_{z}=\frac{1}{E}\left[\sigma_{z}-{\nu}(\sigma_{x}+\sigma_{y})\right],
\qquad\gamma_{xz}=\frac{\tau_{xz}}{G}\;.
\end{equation*}

Continuous medium and internal stresses are abstract scientific
concepts. They differ from real crystalline lattices and laws of
interatomic interaction. Therefore, Hooke's law is a model
approximation of physical processes in solids. However,
experimentally shown that this law is observed with sufficient
accuracy for the vast majority of materials, but only within
specified limits. The limits of applicability of Hooke's law are
limited to the onset of significant deviations from the linear
relationship between stresses and strains. That is, if the
relationship between deformation and stress is linear, then the
calculation of strength, stiffness, and stability is based on the
paradigm of Hooke's law. If the relation between stresses and
strains ceases to be linear, then Hooke's law becomes
inapplicable~[3]. Such situations arise both in experiments and in
theoretical studies.

If we study the dependence of the stress on the strain, the
transition from an elastic to a plastic state is characterized by
a change in the type of increase in stress from linear to
logarithmic, for example~[4, 5]. If the strain is a function of
stress, then the transition from an elastic to a plastic state is
characterized by a change in the type of strain growth from linear
to parabolic or exponential, for example~[6, 7].

The test results for the strength of various materials or the
numerical modeling of their properties are usually presented in
the form of tabular functions. In most cases, their analytical
form is unknown. Currently used graphical methods for determining
the elastic-plastic zone boundaries using the stress-strain curve
are relatively primitive. They are intended only when the stress
is a function of strain~[8, 9]. Cases when strain is a function of
the stress are also it is crucial.

%\bigskip
%\noindent{\small Вестник СПбГУ. Прикладная математика.
%Информатика$\ldots$ 2020. Т. 16. Вып. 4.}

In this regard, it is of practical interest to obtain statistical
criteria that make it possible to determine the moment when the
nature of the monotonous increase in the tabulated value goes from
linear to non-linear type.

%\bigskip
%\noindent
{\bf {2.\,Four classes of approximating functions.}}\; We will
build these criteria in the form of statistics based on a
comparison of the quadratic errors of approximation of a numerical
sequence in four classes of real functions:  linear~---
$f(x)=ax+b$, incomplete parabolic (without linear term)~---
$f(x)=cx^2+d$, logarithmic~--- $f(x)=g\ln(x+1)+h$ and
exponential~--- $f(x)=pe^x+q$. We consider mappings defined on a
discrete subset of points\, $\{t_{0},\,t_ {1},\ldots,
t_{n},\ldots\}$ of the number line $\mathbb{R}$. If all these
points are equidistant, i.~e. for $\forall\; n\colon\;
t_{n}-t_{n-1}=T$, then such functions are called functions of
discrete argument and are denoted as $f[nT]$, where $T$ is the
period of discreteness. The transition from linear to non-linear
dependence does not depend on the scale. Therefore, due to the
similarity transformation, the discreteness period $T$ can be to
the unit one and consider in the further the lattice functions as
numeric sequences\, $y_{n}=\{y_{0}, y_{1}, \ldots,y_{n},
\ldots\}$.

We will accept the agreement that the sequence\, $y_{n}$ is
non-negative, monotonically increasing, and a priori\, $y_{n}$
first changes ``linearly'' and then ``nonlinearly''. For further
constructions, it is necessary to agree on the precise
understanding of the terms: ``linear increase'' and ``nonlinear
increase'' of a numerical sequence. In this case, the evaluation
of the nature of the change in $y_{n}$ is implied by the local.
Not overall values $y_{n}$ but only by several elements $y_{0},
y_{1},\ldots, y_{k-1}$.

We use the concept of an approximating function~[10, 11]. The
approximation nodes for the $y_{n}$ numerical sequence are ordered
pairs $(i, y_{i})$, where $i$ is a natural argument, $y_{i}$ is
the corresponding sequence values of $y_{n}$. Since the subscript
of the sequence $y_{n}$ uniquely identifies natural argument, then
the approximation node $(i, y_{i})$ will be identified with the
element of the sequence $y_{i}$, we will call them ``natural
nodes''. The mapping\, $f(x)$\, from the class of function $X$ is
an approximating function for the natural nodes\, $y_{0}, y_{1},
\ldots, y_{k-1}$, if it is the most is close to these points (in a
certain sense) among all the mappings from $X$. The segment of the
real axis\, $[y_{0},\, y_{k-1}]$\, is called ``a current interval
of approximation''. It is clear that all natural nodes\, $y_{0},
y_{1},\ldots, y_{k-1}$,\, belong to\, $[y_{0},\, y_{k-1}]$.

The sum of the squares of the differences $y_n$ and $f(x)$ with
the corresponding the values of the natural argument is called the
quadratic error of the approximation of the number sequence $y_n$
by the function $f(x)$ at the natural nodes $y_0, y_1,\ldots,
y_{k-1}$:
\begin{equation*}
\delta^2=\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(f(i)-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}
A real function $f(x)$ of a certain class $X$ approximates the
numerical sequence $y_n$ using the method of least squares, if the
following for quadratic form $\delta_f^2$ is true:
\begin{equation*}
\delta_f^2=\min_{f\in X}\sum_{i = 0}^{k-1}(f(i)-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}
Such a minimum can always be found as $\delta_f^2$ is a positive
definite quadratic form~[12, 13].

The quadratic errors for the linear, incomplete parabolic,
logarithmic and exponential approximations for the natural nodes
$y_0,y_1,\ldots,y_{k-1}$ are respectively equal to:
\begin{equation*}
\delta_l^2(k)=\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(a\cdot i+b-y_i )^2, \qquad
\delta_q^2(k)=\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(c\cdot i^2+d-y_i )^2,
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\delta_n^2(k)=\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(g\cdot\ln(i+1)+h-y_i )^2, \qquad
\delta_e^2(k)=\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(p\cdot e^i+q-y_i )^2.
\end{equation*}

Let $m=\min(\delta_l^2(k), \delta_q^2(k), \delta_n^2(k),
\delta_e^2(k)).$

We will assume by definition that increasing the number sequence
$y_n$ over the natural nodes $y_0,y_1,\ldots,y_{k-1}$ is linear if
$m=\delta_l^2(k)$. Respectively: an increase in $y_n$ is parabolic
in nature, if $m=\delta_q^2(k)$, an increase in $y_n$ is
logarithmic, if $m=\delta_n^2(k)$, an increase in $y_n$ is
exponential, if $m=\delta_e^2(k)$.

%\bigskip
%\noindent
{\bf {3. Construction of ``approximation-estimating tests''.}}
When constructing quadratic forms of ``approximation-estimating
tests'', besides the similarity transformation, you can use one
more trick, we will consider the values of the sequence $y_n$ at
the points $y_0, y_1,\ldots, y_{k-1}$ assuming that $y_0=0$~[14,
15]. It is easy to achieve this condition at any approximation
step using a linear transformation:
\begin{equation*}
y_0=y_j-y_j,\;~ y_1=y_{j+1}-y_j,\;~ y_2=y_{j+2}-y_j,\;\ldots\;,\;~
y_{k-1}=y_{j+k-1}-y_j.
\end{equation*}

We will calculate coefficients of the linear, parabolic,
logarithmic, and exponential\linebreak approximation of the
numerical sequence $y_n$ over the natural nodes $y_0, y_1,\ldots,
y_{k-1}$.

First, using the method of least squares, we calculate the
coefficients $a, b$ of the linear function $f(x)=ax+b$
approximating the natural nodes $y_0, y_1, \ldots, y_{k-1}$. For
this, we find the local minimum of the function of two variables
\begin{equation*}
f_l(a, b)=\sum_{i = 0}^{k-1}(a\cdot i+b-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}

Calculate the partial derivatives of the function $f_l(a, b)$
\begin{equation*}\frac{\partial f_l}{\partial a}=2a\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}i^2+2b\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}i-2
\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}i\cdot y_i\;,
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}\frac{\partial f_l}{\partial b}=2a\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}i+2b\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}1-2
\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}y_i \;.
\end{equation*}
By equating them to zero, we obtain a system of linear equations
for the unknown $a$ and $b$:\linebreak
\begin{equation*}\left \{\begin{aligned}
&\frac{k(k-1)(2k-1)}{6}\cdot a+\frac{k(k-1)}{2}\cdot b= \sum^{k-1}_{i=1}i\cdot y_i\,,\\
&\frac{k(k-1)}{2}\cdot a +k\cdot b= \sum^{k-1}_{i=1}y_i\;,
\end{aligned}\right.
\end{equation*}
which implies
\begin{equation*}
a=\frac{6}{k(k^2-1)}\sum^{k-1}_{i=1}(2i+1-k)y_i,\qquad
b=\frac{2}{k(k+1)}\sum^{k-1}_{i=1}(2k-1-3i)y_i.
\end{equation*}

Then we calculate the coefficients $c, d$ of the incomplete
quadratic function $cx^2+d$ as the local minimum for
\begin{equation*}f_q (c,d)=\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}(c\cdot i^2+d-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}

Differentiating $f_q (c,d)$ we find
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{q}}{\partial
c}=2c\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}i^{4}+2d\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}i^2-2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}i^2\cdot
y_{i},
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{q}}{\partial
d}=2c\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}i^2+2d\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}1-2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}y_{i},
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\left\{
  \begin{aligned}
  &\frac{k(k-1)(2k-1)(3k^2-3k-1)}{30}\cdot c+
  \frac{k(k-1)(2k-1)}{6}\cdot d=\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}i^2\cdot y_{i},\\
  &\frac{k(k-1)(2k-1)}{6}\cdot c+k\cdot d=\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_{i}\,.
  \end{aligned}
  \right.
\end{equation*}
We find that
\begin{equation*}
c=\frac{30}{k(k-1)(2k-1)(8k^2-3k-11)}\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}
(6i^2-(k-1)(2k-1))y_{i},
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
d=\frac{6}{k(8k^2-3k-11)}\sum_{i=1}^{k-1} (3k(k-1)-1-5i^2)y_{i}.
\end{equation*}

Using the method of least squares, we calculate the coefficients
of the approximating function $g\ln(x + 1)+h.$ We find the local
minimum of the function
\begin{equation*}
f_n (g,h)=\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}(g\ln(x+1)+h-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}

We calculate the partial derivatives of the function $f_n(g, h)$
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{n}}{\partial g}=2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}
\ln(i+1)(g\ln(i+1)+h-y_{i}),
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{n}}{\partial
h}=2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(g\ln(i+1)+h-y_{i})\;,
\end{equation*}
and equate them to zero, we find the system of equations
\begin{equation*}
\left\{
\begin{aligned}
&g\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln^2(i+1)+h\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)= \sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)y_i,\\
&g\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)+kh= \sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i\;.
\end{aligned}
\right.
\end{equation*}
We find that
\begin{equation*}
g=\frac{k\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)y_i-\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i}
{k\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln^2(i+1)-\left(\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)\right)^2},
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
h=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln^2(i+1)-\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)
\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)y_i}
{k\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln^2(i+1)-\left(\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}\ln(i+1)\right)^2}\;
.
\end{equation*}

Similarly, we calculate the coefficients $p$ and $q$ for the
function $pe^x+q$, through finding the local minimum of the
function
\begin{equation*}
f_e(p, q)=\sum_{i = 0}^{k-1}(pe^i+q-y_i)^2.
\end{equation*}

We calculate the partial derivatives of $f_e(p, q)$, equate them
to zero, and solve the system of linear equations
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{e}}{\partial p}=2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}
e^i(pe^i+q-y_{i}),
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\frac{\partial f_{e}}{\partial q}=2\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}(pe^i+q-y_{i}),
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
\left\{
\begin{aligned}
&p\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^{2i}+q\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i= \sum_{i=1}^{k-1}e^iy_i,\\
&p\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i+kq= \sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i.
\end{aligned}
\right.
\end{equation*}
We find that
\begin{equation*}
p=\frac{k\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}e^iy_i-\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i
\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i}
{k\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^{2i}-\left(\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i\right)^2},
\end{equation*}
\begin{equation*}
q=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}y_i\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^{2i}-\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i
\cdot\sum_{i=1}^{k-1}e^iy_i}
{k\cdot\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^{2i}-\left(\sum_{i=0}^{k-1}e^i\right)^2}.
\end{equation*}

Now it is possible to construct three ``approximation-estimating
tests'', which are designed to determine the moment when the
increase in the monotonous sequence $ y_n $, the numerical
parameters of the solid, changes from linear to parabolic,
logarithmic or exponential.

``Parabolic approximation-estimating test'' has the form
\begin{equation*}
\delta_{lq}^2(k)=\delta_l^2(k)-\delta_q^2(k).
\end{equation*}
If for the natural nodes $y_0, y_1,\ldots, y_{k-1}$ the inequality
$\delta_{lq}^2(k)\le 0$ is satisfied, and for the nodes $y_1,
y_2,\ldots, y_k$, shifted right by one step of discreteness, the
inequality sign changes to the inverse $\delta_{lq}^2(k)>0$, then
we can say that near the point $y_k$ the character of increasing
of the sequence $y_n$ has changed from linear to parabolic.

%\newpage
Similarly, we define:

``logarithmic approximation-estimating test'':
\begin{equation*}
\delta_{ln}^2(k)=\delta_l^2(k)-\delta_n^2(k),
\end{equation*}

``exponential approximation-estimating test'':
\begin{equation*}
\delta_{le}^2(k)=\delta_l^2(k)-\delta_e^2(k).
\end{equation*}

%\bigskip
%\noindent
{\bf 4.\,Markov's moments for the boundaries of elastic
deformation.} Consider a physical or numerical experiment as a
random process.

Let $T=\overline{1,m-1}$,\, a bounded subset of the natural series
containing the first $m-1$ natural numbers (we note right away
that $m$ can be arbitrarily large). Then the indexed family
$\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T\}$ of random variables
$\xi_{t}=\xi_{t}(\omega)$ given for $\forall\; t\in T$ on the same
probability space $(\Omega, \mathcal{F},\mathrm{P})$ is called a
discrete random process~[16, 17].

Each random variable $\xi_{t}$ generates an $\sigma$-algebra,
which will be denoted as $\mathcal{F}_{\xi_{t}}$. Then the
$\sigma$-algebra generated by the random process $\xi=\{\xi_{t},
t\in T\}$ is the smallest $\sigma$-algebra containing all
$\mathcal{F}_{\xi_{ t}}$ that is
\begin{equation*}
\sigma(\xi)=\sigma\left(\bigcup^{m-1}_{t=1}\mathcal
{F}_{\xi_{t}}\right).
\end{equation*}

A discrete random process\, $\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T \}$ can be
considered as a function of two variables $\xi=\xi(t, \omega)$,
where $t$ is a natural the argument $\omega$ is a random event. If
we fix $t$, then, as mentioned above, we get a random variable
$\xi_{t}$, but if we fix a random event $\omega_{0}$, we get a
function of the natural argument $t$, which is called the
trajectory of the random process $\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T\}$ and is
a random sequence $\xi_{t}(\omega_{0})$.

We will consider only those random processes whose trajectories
monotonically increase. An arbitrary random $\omega\in\Omega$
event is to extract a sample $X$ from the $n$-dimensional
Euclidean space $\mathbb{E}^{n}$. Theoretically, any point
$\overline{x}\in\mathbb{E}^{n}$ can belong to the sampling $X$,
therefore, the $\sigma$-algebra from the probability space
$(\Omega,\mathcal{F},\mathrm{P})$ contains $\mathbb{E}^{n}$, any
finite set $X$ from the space $\mathbb{E}^{n}$, all possible
countable unions of such sets, and additions to by him. Denote
this system of sets as $\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right)$
and call it ``selective $\sigma$-algebra''
$\mathcal{F}=\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right).$ The same
reasoning is valid for any $\sigma$-algebra
$\mathcal{F}_{\xi_{t}}$, therefore,
$$\sigma(\xi)=\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right).$$

Note that this $\sigma$-algebra is ``poorer'' than the Borel
$\sigma$-algebra ---
$\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right)\subset\mathcal{B}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right)$.
Indeed, a countable union of at most countable sets is countable,
therefore, $\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right)$ does not
contain intervals.

We will consider the problem of testing statistical hypotheses
$H_{0}$ and $H_{1}$~[18]. There are two hypotheses  $H_{0}$: ``the
random sequence $\xi_{t}(\omega_{0})$ increases is linear'', and
$H_{1}$: ``the random sequence $\xi_{t}(\omega_{0})$, increases is
nonlinearly''. $H_{0}$\, is called the null hypothesis, $H_{1}$\,
is called the alternative hypothesis.

It is necessary to construct a criterion as a strict mathematical
rule, to test the statistical hypothesis. That rule accepts or
rejects the hypothesis. Any statistical criterion is based on a
random sample $X$. Two cases are possible. The first one, a sample
$X$, is extracted from $\mathbb{E}^{n}$ simultaneously and has a
fixed size. The second one, when a sample $X$ form at the period.
Then its size is a random variable.  In this case, the sequential
analysis and the construction of a stopping time are
used~[19--21].

Let $(\Omega,\mathcal{F},\mathrm{P})$ be a probability space, then
the indexed family of $\sigma$-algebras
\mbox{$\mathfrak{F}=\{\mathcal{F}_{t}, t\in T\}$} is called a
filtration if for $\forall\; i,j\in
T\,|\,i<j\,\colon\,\mathcal{F}_{i}\subset\mathcal{F}_{j}\subset\mathcal{F}$.\,
Moreover, if for $\forall\; t\in T$\, right\,
$\mathcal{F}_{t}=\sigma(\xi_{i},\,i<t)$, then the filtration is
called natural. The random process $\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T\}$ is
said to be adapted to the filtration $\mathfrak{F}$ if for
$\forall\; t\in
T\,\colon\,\sigma(\xi_{t})=\mathcal{F}_{\xi_{t}}\subset\mathcal{F}_{t}$.

Any stochastic process $\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T\}$ is an adapted
process with respect to its natural filtration. The mapping
$\tau\, \colon\,\Omega\longrightarrow T$ is called Markov
moment~[22] or stopping time (with respect to the filtration
$\mathfrak{F}$) if for $\forall\; t\in T$ the preimage of the set
$\{\tau\le t\}\in\mathcal{F}_{t}$. In other words, let $\tau$ be
the moment of occurrence of some event in the random process
$\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in T\}$. If for $\forall\; t_{0}\in T$, you can
definitely say if the event $\tau$ has come or not, provided that
the values of $\xi_{t}$ are known only in the past (to the left of
$t_{0}$), then $\tau$ is a Markov moment with respect to natural
filtration of $\mathfrak{F}$, random process $\xi=\{\xi_{t}, t\in
T\}$~[21, 23]. In this case for a random sequence
$\xi_{t}(\omega_{0})$ the natural filtration an adapted with
process is it the selective $\sigma$-algebra
$\mathcal{S}\left(\mathbb{E}^{n}\right).$

In the case of the sequential statistical analysis, one can define
the Markov moment (or stopping time) of the experiment as the
values of $t$ in which the change occurred like an increase in the
random sequence $\xi_{t}(\omega_{0})$ from linear type to
nonlinear type. As such, we reject the null hypothesis $H_{0}$ and
accept the alternative hypothesis $H_{1}$. We write out the values
of $\tau$ explicitly.

The transition from linear increase to parabolic growth --- the
Markov moment:
\begin{equation*}
\tau=\min\{t\mid\;\delta^2_{lq}(k)>0\}.
\end{equation*}

The transition from linear increase to logarithmic growth --- the
Markov moment:
\begin{equation*}
\tau=\min\{t\mid\;\delta^2_{ln}(k)>0\}.
\end{equation*}

The transition from a linear increase to an exponential growth ---
the Markov moment:
\begin{equation*}
\tau=\min\{t\mid\;\delta^2_{le}(k)>0\}.
\end{equation*}

%\bigskip
%\noindent
{\bf 5.\,Numerical simulation example.} Let us consider the
experiment results on uniform bending by a concentrated force $P$
of a cantilever beam of model material with a single step of
discreteness. It is required to determine the point in time when
elastic deformation turns into plastic deformation. We use the
hypothesis that the beginning of the plasticity development
coincides with the point in time when the strains begin to
increase rapidly, and their dependence on the load ceases to be
linear. We will write a ``parabolic approximation-estimating
test'' previously constructed for four natural nodes~[14, 15]:

\begin{equation*}
\delta_{lq}^2(4)=\frac{1}{245}(19y_1^2-11y_2^2+41y_3^2+12y_1y_2-64y_1y_3-46y_2y_3).
\end{equation*}

The deformation values and values of the criterion $\delta^{2}(4)$
are given in the Table. Values $y_p$ present in a dimensionless
and normalized form. The stress is also normalized and increases
in the unit step. The symbol $\delta^{2}_{4}$ denotes the
criterion value under natural nodes:\, $y_{1}, y_{2}, y_{3},
y_{4}$,\, the symbol $\delta^{2}_{5}$ under nodes:\, $y_{2},
y_{3}, y_{4}, y_{5}$, etc.

The first members of $y_{n}$ is increase almost linear, since
$\delta^{2}_{lq}=\delta^{2}_{l}-\delta^{2}_{q}<0$. Sign becomes
positive of the quadratic form $\delta^{2}_{lq}$ for nodes:
\mbox{$y_{26}=15.90,  y_{27}=16.47, y_{28}=17.26, y_{29}=$}
$18.62$. It means that the character of increasing $y_{n}$ has
changed and has become parabolic.  The graph of the numerical
sequence\, $y_{n}$,\, shown in  Figure, confirms this.

\begin{table}[h!]
\begin{center}
{\small

{\it Table.} {\bf Values of the strain $y_p$ and values the
criterion $\delta^{2}(4)$}%

}

\vskip 3mm

{\footnotesize

\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline%\noalign{\smallskip}
Step number & Strain id & Strain value & Criterion id & Criterion value \\
%\noalign{\smallskip}
\hline%\noalign{\smallskip}
1 & $y_{1}$ & $1.00$  & --- & --- \\
2 & $y_{2}$ & $1.51$  & --- & --- \\
3 & $y_{3}$ & $2.03$  & --- & --- \\
4 & $y_{4}$ & $2.54$  & $\delta^{2}_{4}$ & $-0.11$ \\
5 & $y_{5}$ & $3.05$  & $\delta^{2}_{5}$ & $-0.11$ \\
6 & $y_{6}$ & $3.57$  & $\delta^{2}_{6}$ & $-0.11$ \\
7 & $y_{7}$ & $4.08$  & $\delta^{2}_{7}$ & $-0.11$ \\
8 & $y_{8}$ & $4.59$  & $\delta^{2}_{8}$ & $-0.11$ \\
9 & $y_{9}$ & $5.10$  & $\delta^{2}_{9}$ & $-0.11$ \\
10 & $y_{10}$ & $5.74$  & $\delta^{2}_{10}$ & $-0.08$ \\
11 & $y_{11}$ & $6.25$  & $\delta^{2}_{11}$ & $-0.13$ \\
12 & $y_{12}$ & $6.76$  & $\delta^{2}_{12}$ & $-0.16$ \\
13 & $y_{13}$ & $7.27$  & $\delta^{2}_{13}$ & $-0.11$ \\
14 & $y_{14}$ & $8.08$  & $\delta^{2}_{14}$ & $-0.04$ \\
15 & $y_{15}$ & $8.60$  & $\delta^{2}_{15}$ & $-0.16$ \\
16 & $y_{16}$ & $9.11$  & $\delta^{2}_{16}$ & $-0.26$ \\
17 & $y_{17}$ & $9.79$  & $\delta^{2}_{17}$ & $-0.07$ \\
18 & $y_{18}$ & $10.30$ & $\delta^{2}_{18}$ & $-0.14$ \\
19 & $y_{19}$ & $11.03$  & $\delta^{2}_{19}$ & $-0.14$ \\
20 & $y_{20}$ & $11.61$  & $\delta^{2}_{20}$ & $-0.13$ \\
21 & $y_{21}$ & $12.26$  & $\delta^{2}_{21}$ & $-0.20$ \\
22 & $y_{22}$ & $13.29$  & $\delta^{2}_{22}$ & $-0.02$ \\
23 & $y_{23}$ & $13.86$  & $\delta^{2}_{23}$ & $-0.28$ \\
24 & $y_{24}$ & $14.63$  & $\delta^{2}_{24}$ & $-0.36$ \\
25 & $y_{25}$ & $15.00$  & $\delta^{2}_{25}$ & $-0.21$ \\
26 & $y_{26}$ & $15.90$  & $\delta^{2}_{26}$ & $-0.12$ \\
27 & $y_{27}$ & $16.47$  & $\delta^{2}_{27}$ & $-0.09$ \\
28 & $y_{28}$ & $17.26$  & $\delta^{2}_{28}$ & $-0.27$ \\
29 & $y_{29}$ & $18.62$  & $\delta^{2}_{29}$ & $0.14$ \\
30 & $y_{30}$ & $20.52$  &  --- & --- \\
31 & $y_{31}$ & $23.46$  &  --- & --- \\
32 & $y_{32}$ & $28.17$  &  --- & --- \\
%\noalign{\smallskip}
\hline
\end{tabular}

}
\end{center}\vspace{-3mm}
\end{table}
%\vskip 2mm


\begin{figure}[h!]
\centering{
\includegraphics[scale=1]{04/fig1}

\vskip 1mm {\small{\it Figure.} Strain-stress curve for uniform
bending\\ by a concentrated force $P$ of a cantilever beam\\} }
\end{figure}



%\begin{figure}[h!]
%\centering
%\includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{fig5.eps}
%\end{figure}
%\begin{center}
%{\small Fig.~1.\;Strain-stress curve for uniform bending by a
%concentrated force $P$ of a cantilever beam.}
%\end{center}

%\smallskip
%\noindent
{\bf 6.\,Conclusion.} ``Approximation-estimation tests'' allow,
with some probability, to determine the Markov moment in a
physical or numerical experiment when the limit of applicability
of Hooke's law is reached. A significant problem is related to the
sensitivity of ``approximation-estimating tests'' toward the
length of the current interval of approximation and step of
discreteness. This problem is that by a tiny step of discreteness,
the change in any monotonic sequence will be linear, and to detect
the occurrence of nonlinearity, it is necessary to increase the
length of the current interval of approximation. Indeed, an
increment of any smooth function is an infinitesimal quantity. It
has been known that, in a small neighborhood, this increment is
accurately approximated by the differential. However, as the
argument increments increase, the differential approximation
ceases to be satisfactory. Therefore, there is no general answer
to the problem posed. It should bear in mind that the increase in
the number of natural nodes of approximation inevitably entails a
geometric increase in the computational complexity of constructing
a quadratic form for these tests.

The following thought gives some relief to the mind. If the
discreteness step is so small that the approximation parameters of
the stress-strain state of a solid still change linearly in the
current interval, then the corresponding mathematical models can
be built within the paradigm of generalized Hooke's law. On the
other hand, proposed ``approximation-estimating tests'' allow us
to determine the boundaries beyond which Hooke's law's use becomes
incorrect. By the way, this law has usually used for small
deformations. Therefore, admitting freedom of speech, it can be
said that the ``approximation-estimating tests'' allow not only to
determine the boundaries of the application of Hooke's law but
also to formally approach the determination of the quantitative
value of small deformation, for each fixed structural material.




%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{04/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{04/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize


%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~16.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~16.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
