

\noindent{\small UDC 517.929.4  \hfill {\footnotesize Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}\\
MSC 74J55

}

\vskip2mm

\noindent{\bf Stability of weak solutions of parabolic systems\\ with distributed parameters on the graph%$^{*}$%

 }

\vskip2.5mm

\noindent{\it  A.~P.~Zhabko$\,^1$%
, A.~I.~Shindyapin$\,^2$%
, V.~V.~Provotorov$\,^3$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%
%, I.~О. Famylia%$\,^2$%

}

\efootnote{
%%
%\vspace{-3mm}\parindent=7mm
%%
%\vskip 0.1mm $^{*}$ M. V. Bulatov and E. V. Chistyakova
%acknowledge the financial support from the Russian Foun\-dation
%for Basic Research (projects N 18-51-54001,  18-01-00643,
%18-29-10019).\par
%%
%%\vskip 2.0mm
%%
\indent{\copyright} Санкт-Петербургский государственный
университет, \issueyear%
}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04 } }\hfill\thepage}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\thepage\hfill{\footnotesize\rm{\doivyp/spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

\vskip2mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize

\noindent%
$^1$~%
St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9, Universitetskaya nab.,
St.\,Petersburg,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
199034, Russian Federation

\noindent%
$^2$~%
Eduardo Mondlane University, 1, Julius Nyerere av.,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
3453, Maputo, Mozambique

\noindent%
$^3$~%
Voronezh~State~University,~1,~Universitetskaya~pl.,~Voronezh,

\noindent%
\hskip2.45mm%
394006, Russian~Federation

%\noindent%
%$^2$~%
%St.\,Petersburg State University, 7--9,
%Universitetskaya nab., St.\,Petersburg,

%\noindent%
%\hskip2.45mm%
%199034, Russian Federation

}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\vskip3mm

{\small \noindent \textbf{For citation:}
Zhabko~A.~P.,~Shindyapin~A.~I.,~Provotorov~V.~V.  Stability of
weak solutions of parabolic systems with distributed parameters on
the graph. {\it Vestnik of Saint~Petersburg University. Applied
Mathematics. Computer Science. Control Processes}, \issueyear,
vol.~15, iss.~\issuenum,
pp.~\pageref{p4}--\pageref{p4e}. %\\
\doivyp/\enskip%
\!\!\!spbu10.\issueyear.\issuenum04

\vskip3mm

{\leftskip=7mm\noindent The analysis of the behaviour of the
evolutionary equation solution with unlimited time variable has
been a subject of discussion in scientific circles for a long
time.  There are many practical reasons for this when the initial
conditions of the equation are specified with a certain error: how
the small changes in the initial conditions affect the behaviour
of the solution for large values of the time. The paper uses the
classical understanding of the stability of the solution of a
differential equation or a system of equations that goes back to
the works of A.~M.~Lyapunov: a solution is stable if it little
changes under the small perturbations of the initial condition. In
the work specified the stability conditions for the solution of an
evolutionary parabolic system with distributed parameters on a
graph describing the process of transfer of a continuous mass in a
spatial network are indicated. The parabolic system is considered
in the weak formulation: a weak solution of the system is a
summable function that satisfies the integral form identity, which
determines the variational formulation for the initial-boundary
value problem. By going beyond the classical (smooth) solutions
and addressing weak solutions of the problem the authors aim not
only to describe more precisely the physical nature of the
transfer processes (this takes on particular importance when
studying the dynamics of multiphase media) but also to the path
analysis processes in multidimensional network-like domains. The
used approach is based on a priori estimates of the weak solution
and the construction (the Fayedo---Galerkin method with a special
basis~--- the system of eigenfunctions of the elliptic operator of
a parabolic equation) of a weakly compact family of approximate
solutions in the selected state space. The obtained results
underlie the analysis of optimal control problems for differential
systems with distributed parameters on a graph, which have
interesting analogies with multiphase problems of multidimensional
hydrodynamics.\\[1mm]
\textit{Keywords}: evolutionary system of parabolic type,
distributed parameters on the graph, a weak solution, stability of
a weak solutions.

}

}

\vskip 4mm

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%


\textbf{1. Introduction.} Today have a lot of the results on the
mathematical theory of stability, however, as we know  they are
all overwhelmingly oriented on the ordinary differential equations
and systems. In many applications because of the complexity of the
mathematical models have to abandon the use of ordinary
differential equations in behalf of considering the evolutionary
equations with partial derivatives.   Precisely this case is the
object of the study in this work, in which represent the analysis
of the stability of the weak solutions of the evolutionary systems
with distributed parameters on the graph with unlimited growing of
the temporary variable. By studying the relevant initial-boundary
value problem, we to by beyond the scope a classical solutions and
reduce to the weak solutions of the problem, reflecting more
accurately the physical essence of appearance and processes
(i.~e. consider the initial-boundary value problem in weak
formulation). This solutions reflects more exactly the physical
essence of phenomena and processes. It is well known the choice of
the class of weak solutions to be determined one way or the other
functional space that is available to the researcher. This choice
was made, first of all, the requirement of conservation of the
existence theorem and the uniqueness theorem, if it is corresponds
to the spirit of the studied phenomenon or process.


We are sufficiently detailed form here is the proof of the
existence of weak solutions of initial-boundary value problem in
distinct spaces  (analogously reasoning shows in the works
[1--4]). It is necessary to demonstrate the equivalent concept of
Lyapunov stability of the undisturbed state differential system
for differential equations with partial derivatives and show the
ability to use known results [5, 6] in the studied case.


\textbf{2. Notation, concepts and basic statement.}  We introduce
the following concepts and symbols adopted in the works [3, 4]:
$\Gamma$ is the limited oriented geometric graph with edges
$\gamma$, parameterized the segment  $[0,1]$; $\partial\Gamma$ and
$J(\Gamma)$ are the many of boundary  $\zeta$ and internally
$\xi$ nodes of graph  respectively; $\Gamma_0$ is the join of all
the edges of the graph  $\Gamma$, does not contain the endpoints;
$\Gamma_{t}=\Gamma_0\times(0,t)$
($\gamma_{t}=\gamma_0\times(0,t)$), $\partial \Gamma_{t}=\partial
\Gamma\times(0,t)$ ($t\in(0,T]$, $T<\infty$).

In all the course of the work make use of the Lebesgue integral
along $\Gamma$  or $\Gamma_{t}$:

%\[
%{
%{
\begin{equation*}
\begin{array}{%*{20}
c} \int\limits_{\Gamma}f(x)dx=\sum\limits_{\gamma}f(x)_\gamma
dx\quad \text{or} \quad
\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}f(x,t)dxdt=\sum\limits_{\gamma_t}f(x,t)_\gamma
dxdt,%$
\end{array}\end{equation*} %}}
 $f(\cdot)_\gamma$ is narrowing function $f(\cdot)$ on the edge
$\gamma$.

We use  classic space of  functions: $C(\Gamma)$ is a space
continuous functions on  $\Gamma$; $L_{p}(\Gamma)$ ($p=1,2$) is a
Banach space of measurable functions on  $\Gamma_0$, integrable
with degree of order $p$ (similarly defined the space
$L_{p}(\Gamma_T)$); $L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})$ is the space of
functions from $L_1(\Gamma_{T})$ with norm defined by ratio
$\|u\|_{L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})}=\int\limits_0^T(\int\limits_{\Gamma}u^2dx)^{\frac{1}{2}}dt$.

We also use   analogues of Sobolev's spaces [7, 8]:
$W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)$ is the space of functions from
$L_{2}(\Gamma)$, with generalized derivative of order  $1$ also
from  $L_{2}(\Gamma)$; $W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ is the space of
functions from  $L_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$ with generalized derivative of
order 1 for $x$  belonging to space  $L_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$
(similarly defined the space  $W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma_{T}))$.

Relabel $V_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$  the set of all functions  $u(x,t)\in
W_{2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ with finite norm
\begin{equation}\label{eq1}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|u\|_{2,\Gamma_{T}}\equiv
\mathop{\max}\limits_{0\leq t\leq
T}\left\|u(\cdot,t)\right\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\left\|u_x\right\|_{L_2(\Gamma_{T})}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
In addition these functions are continuous on  $t$ in norm space
$L_{2}(\Gamma)$,  that is under $\Delta t \rightarrow 0$
$\|u(t+\Delta t) - u(t)\|_{L_{2}(\Gamma)}\rightarrow 0$ uniformly
on $[0,T]$.

We will introduce the state space of parabolic system and the
auxiliary space.  To do this, consider the bilinear form
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell(\mu,\nu)=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{d \mu(x)}{d
x}\frac{d \nu(x)}{d x}+b(x)\mu(x)\nu(x)\right)dx
 \end{array} }}
\]
with a fixed measurable and limited on  $\Gamma_0$ functions
$a(x)$, $b(x)$ square integrable:
\begin{equation}\label{eq2}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} 0< a_{*} \leq a(x)\leq a^{*},\;\;
|b(x)|\leq \beta,\;\; x\in \Gamma .
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Following approval is valid [9, p. 92].\pagebreak

\textbf{Lemma 1.} \emph{Let the function $u(x)\in
W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ such that
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell(u,\nu)-\int\limits_{\Gamma}f(x)\nu(x)dx=0
 \end{array} }}
\]
for any  }$\nu(x)\in W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ ($f(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$
\emph{is the fixed function}).

\emph{Then  for any edge  $\gamma\subset\Gamma$ the narrowing of
the function $a(x)_\gamma\frac{du(x)_\gamma}{dx}$ continuously in
the endpoints of the edge $\gamma$.}

Relabel $\Omega_a(\Gamma)$ the many of these functions $u(x)$
satisfying the ratios
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \sum\limits_{\gamma\in
R(\xi)}a(1)_\gamma\frac{du (1)_\gamma}{dx}
 =\sum\limits_{\gamma\in r(\xi)}a(0)_\gamma\frac{du (0)_\gamma}{dx}
 \end{array} }}
\]
in all nodes  $\xi\in J(\Gamma)$ (in here  $R(\xi)$ and $r(\xi)$
as the sets of the edges  $\gamma$ accordingly oriented  ``to node
$\xi$'' and ``from node  $\xi$'') and $u(x)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0$.
The closing of the set  $\Omega_a(\Gamma)$  in norm
$W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$  relabel $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$.

Let the next  $\Omega_a(\Gamma_{T})$ is the set of functions
$u(x,t)\in V_{2}(\Gamma_{T})$, whose traces are defined in
sections of the domain  $\Gamma_{T}$ the plane  $t=t_0$ ($t_0\in
[0,T]$) as a function of class  $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ and satisfy
a ratios
\begin{equation}\label{eq3}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \sum\limits_{\gamma\in
R(\xi)}a(1)_\gamma\frac{\partial u(1,t)_\gamma}{\partial x}
=\sum\limits_{\gamma\in r(\xi)}a(0)_\gamma\frac{\partial
u(0,t)_\gamma}{\partial x}
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for all nodes  $\xi\in J(\Gamma)$. The closing of the set
$\Omega_a(\Gamma_{T})$ in norm  (1)  relabel
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$; it is clear that
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})\subset W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$.

Another the subspace of the space  $ W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$
is $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$; $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$  is the
closing in norm  $W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ the set of
differentiable on $\Gamma_0$ functions $u(x,t)$ satisfy a ratios
(3) for all nodes  $\xi\in J(\Gamma)$ and boundary condition
$u(x,t)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0$ for any  $t\in [0,T]$ (the
derivatives in the nodes are defined as the one-sided derivative).
The space $W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$  is defined similarly.

\textbf{Remark  1.} The space  $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ describes
the states set of parabolic system, $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ is the
auxiliary space. The distinction of elements space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ from elements space $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$
is the absence of elements of $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ continuity for
the temporary variable $t$.


In spaces $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ and $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$
consider the parabolic equation
\begin{equation}\label{eq4}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 \frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial t}-\frac{\partial }{\partial x }\left(a(x)\frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial x}\right)+b(x)y(x,t)=f(x,t),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
represents a system of differential equations with distributed
parameters on each edge  $\gamma$ of the graph  $\Gamma$;
$f(x,t)\in L_{2,1}(\Gamma_{T})$. The state  $y(x,t)$
$(x,t\in\overline{\Gamma}_{T})$  of the system  (4) in the domain
$\overline{\Gamma}_{T}$ is determined by a weak solution  $y(x,t)$
of the equation  (4), satisfying the initial and boundary
conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq5}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y\mid_{t=0}=\varphi(x),\quad x\in\Gamma,
\quad y\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_T}=0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where $\varphi(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$. The suppositions about
functions $a(x)$ and $b(x)$ to make mention above in (2). From
$y(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ should be noted, that the map
$y:[0,T]\rightarrow W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)\subset L_2(\Gamma)$ is a
continuous function, so that the first equality  (5) makes sense
and is be understood almost everywhere.

\textbf{Remark  2.} In the work considers the initial-boundary
value problem (4), (5) with Dirichlet boundary conditions in the
ratios (5), for other types of boundary conditions is given any
comment.

We present the basic statements and the basic fragments of proofs
of their first in auxiliary space  $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, then
in the space $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, full proofs given in the
work~[4].

\textbf{Definition 1.}  \emph{A weak solution of the
initial-boundary value problem} (4), (5) class
$W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ \emph{is the function  $y(x,t)\in
W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, that satisfies an integral identity}
\begin{equation}\label{eq6}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
-\int\limits_{\Gamma_{T}}y(x,t)\frac{\partial \eta(x,t)}{\partial
t}dxdt+\ell_T(y,\eta)=
\int\limits_{\Gamma}{\varphi}(x)\eta(x,0)dx+\int\limits_{\Gamma_{T}}{f}(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dxdt
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
\emph{for any function $\eta(x,t)\in W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ equal to
zero under $t=T$; $\ell_t(y,\eta)$ is bilinear form defined by the
ratio of}
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell_t(y,\eta)=\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}\left(a(x)\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial x}\frac{\partial \eta(x,t)}{\partial
x}+b(x)y(x,t)\eta(x,t)\right)dxdt, \quad t\in(0,T].
 \end{array} }}
\]

\textbf{Definition 2.} \emph{A weak solution of the
initial-boundary value problem} (4), (5) class
$W_{\,2}^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ \emph{is the function  $y(x,t)\in
V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$, that satisfies an integral identity}
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \int\limits_{\Gamma}y(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dx-\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}y(x,t)\frac{\partial
\eta(x,t)}{\partial t}dxdt+\ell_{t}(y,\eta)=
\\
=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\varphi(x)\eta(x,0)dx+\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}f(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dxdt
 \end{array} }}
\]
\emph{under any $t\in[0,T]$ and  for any function $\eta(x,t)\in
W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$.}

In proving solvability the problem (4), (5) in the space
$W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ (and $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$) is a special
basis of space $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$~--- system of generalized
eigenfunctions of boundary value problem on the eigenvalues (the
spectral problem)
\begin{equation}\label{eq7}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
-\frac{d}{dx}\left(a(x)\frac{du(x)}{dx}\right)+b(x)u(x)=\lambda
u(x),\,\,\,u(x)|_{\partial\Gamma}=0,
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
in class $W^1(a,\Gamma)$ [10, 11]. This problem consists in
finding many such numbers (eigenvalues boundary value problem
(7)), each of which corresponds to at least one nontrivial
generalized solution $u(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ (the
generalized eigenfunction), satisfies the integral identity
\begin{equation}\label{eq8}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \ell(u,\eta)=\lambda(u,\eta)
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any function $\eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ (here and
everywhere below through $\left(\cdot,\cdot\right)$  designated
scalar product in $L_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ or $L_{\,2}(\Gamma_T)$).
Install the necessary further properties of eigenvalues and
generalized eigenfunctions of spectral problem (7). To do this, we
will introduce in the space $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ of new scalar
product
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
[u,v]=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{d u(x)}{d x}\frac{d
v(x)}{d
x}+(\lambda_0+b(x))u(x)v(x)\right)dx=\ell(u,v)+\lambda_0(u,v),
\end{array} }}
\]
where $\lambda_0$ defined by inequalities $\lambda_0>\beta$. Then
given (2), correctly ratio
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [u,v]\geq a_{*}\|\frac{d u}{d
x}\|^2+(\lambda_0-\beta)\|\frac{d v}{d x}\|^2\geq \alpha(\|\frac{d
u}{d x}\|^2+\|\frac{d v}{d x}\|^2),
\end{array} }}
\]
$\alpha>0$ is fixed constant. The latter means equivalence of
norms $\|u\|_{[\cdot,\cdot]}=\sqrt{[u,u]}$ induced by the scalar
product $[\cdot,\cdot]$, and norm of space
$W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$. The generalized eigenfunctions of
spectral problem (7)  satisfy the integral identity
\begin{equation}\label{eq9}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [u,\eta]=(\lambda_0+\lambda)(u,\eta)
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any function $\eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$.\pagebreak

In space $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$  we define the operator  $B$ by
using identities
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [Bu,\eta]=(u,\eta)\;\;\; ~  \forall
\eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma),
\end{array} }}
\]
then identity (9) is equivalent to
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} [Bu,\eta]=\tilde{\lambda}[u,\eta]\;\;\; ~
\forall \eta(x)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma),
\end{array} }}
\]
where $\tilde{\lambda}=1/(\lambda_0+\lambda)$. It is easy to
verify that the operator $B$ is completely, self-adjoint  and
positive. Whence it follows that the eigenvalues
$\{\tilde{\lambda}_i\}$, $i\geq 1$, of its valid, positive and
they can be considered numbered in descending order, taking into
account their multiplicity, where $\tilde{\lambda}_i\rightarrow 0$
under $i\rightarrow \infty$. Note that the point
$\tilde{\lambda}=0$ not its eigenvalue, because under
$\tilde{\lambda}=0$ from the definition of the operator $B$
derives $u=0$. The generalized eigenfunctions $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq
1}$, that correspond to their eigenvalues
$\{\tilde{\lambda}_i\}_{i\geq 1}$, are real and mutually
orthogonal: $[u_i,u_j]=0$ under $i\neq j$. In view of the
foregoing, the system of generalized eigenfunctions
$\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ form a basis in space
$W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$, as $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ densely in
$L_2(\Gamma)$, then $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$ is basic in
$L_2(\Gamma)$ (you can take that the basis $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$
is orthonormalized in $L_2(\Gamma)$). Taking into account  the
connection $\lambda_i=-\lambda_0+{1/\tilde{\lambda}_i}$  of the
eigenvalues $\lambda_i$ of spectral problem (7) and the
eigenvalues $\tilde{\lambda}_i$ of the operator $B$, as well as
the coincidence by him corresponding generalized eigenfunctions,
come to the following statement.

\textbf{Lemma 2.} \emph{Let met supposition }(2). \emph{Then the
spectral problem} (7) \emph{has the denumerable set of real
eigenvalues $\{\lambda_i\}_{i\geq 1}$} (\emph{indexed in ascending
order, taking into account their multiplicity}) \emph{with limit
point at infinity} (\emph{the eigenvalues $\lambda_i$ are
positive, with the except ion of maybe finite number first}).
\emph{The system of generalized eigenfunctions  $\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq
1}$  form a basis in $W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ and $L_2(\Gamma)$,
orthonormalized in $L_2(\Gamma)$  and orthogonal in  meaning of
the scalar product $[\cdot,\cdot]$.}


\textbf{Remark 3.}  If $0\leq b(x)\leq\beta$, as is usually the
case in the applications, then all eigenvalues of the spectral
problem (7) is positive. Indeed, this follows from the integral
identities (8), when $u=\eta=u_i(x)$, $\lambda=\lambda_i$  and a
chain of equalities
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\ell(u_i,u_i)=\lambda_i(u_i,u_i)=\lambda_i\|u_i\|^2=\lambda_i
\end{array} }}
\]
for $i=1,2,...$ (see also [9, p. 98]). The positiveness of the
eigenvalues is the determining factor for establishing the
stability condition and the possibility of the stability of
evolutionary systems of parabolic equations with distributed
parameters on the graph.




\textbf{Theorem 1. } \emph{If any $f(x)\in L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$,
$\varphi(x)\in L_2(\Gamma)$ and for any  $0<T<\infty$ the
initial-boundary value problem} (4), (5) \emph{is weak solvability
in space $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$.}

{P~r~o~o~f.} In proving theorems construct the Faedo---Galerkin
approximation on the basis $\{u_n(x)\}_{n\geq 1}$: the approximate
solutions ($N$ is fixed natural number) (4), (5) have the form
$y^N(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^Nc_i^N(t)u_i(x)$, where $c_i^N(t)$ is
absolutely continuous on $[0,T]$ functions ($c'_i(t)\in
L_2(0,T)$), defined from the system
\begin{equation}\label{eq10}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \left(\frac{\partial y^N}{\partial
t},u_i\right)+\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{\partial
y^N(x,t)}{\partial x}\frac{d u_i(x)}{d
x}+b(x)y^N(x,t)u_i(x)\right)dx= \left({f},u_i\right),\,\\
c_i^N(0)=({\varphi},u_i),\,\,i=\overline{1,N}.
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
Further reasoning based on a priori estimates of norm of weak
solutions (4), (5) and construction the subsequence
$\left\{y^{N_k}\right\}_{k\geq1}$ of sequence
$\left\{y^N\right\}_{N\geq1}$, weakly converge to solution
$y(x,t)\in W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$   in a norm of
$W^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$ (weak compactness
$\left\{y^{N_k}\right\}_{k\geq1}$). Namely~[4, 7],  for
approximate solutions $y^N(x,t)$  the  inequality by
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y^N\|_{2,\Gamma_t} \leq
C(t)\left(\|y^N(x,0)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}+2\|{f}\|_{L_{2,1}(\Gamma_t)}\right),
 \end{array} }}
\]
is valid for any  $t\in[0,T]$; here the function $C(t)$ is limited
to $t\in[0,T]$ ($C(t)\leq C^*, C^*>0$), not depend on $N$, is
determined by the value $T$ and permanent $a^\ast$, $\beta$. From
this inequality, taking into account the ratio
$c_i^N(0)=({\varphi},u_i)$ ($i=\overline{1,N}$)  and by virtue of
inequalities
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y^N(x,0)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}=\|\sum\limits_{i=1}^N({\varphi},u_i)u_i(x)\|\leq
\sqrt{\sum\limits_{i=1}^N|({\varphi},u_i)|}\leq\|\varphi\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}
 \end{array} }}
\]
$\biggl(\|\cdot\|$ {\rm is Euclidean norm:}
$\|\omega\|=\sqrt{\sum_{i=1}^N\omega_i^2}\biggr)$,  it should be
\begin{equation}\label{eq11}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y^N\|_{2,\Gamma_t} \leq
C(t)\left(\|\varphi\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}+2\|{f}\|_{L_{2,1}(\Gamma_t)}\right),
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
it means independent of $N$ estimate
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y^N\|_{2,\Gamma_t} \leq C\,\, ~ (C>0).
 \end{array} }}
\]
The latter means: from the sequence $\left\{y^N\right\}_{N\geq1}$
with limited totality elements $y^N$ can be distinguish the
subsequence $\left\{y^{N_k}\right\}_{k\geq1}$, that converge
weakly  to certain element $y\in W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ at a norm
$W^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})$  ($\left\{y^{N_k}\right\}_{k\geq1}$ converge
weakly to $y$ together with $\frac{\partial y^{N_k}}{\partial x}$
at a norm $L_2(\Gamma_T)$). As a result of the consequent
reasoning become clear that the all sequence
$\left\{y^N\right\}_{N\geq1}$ is weakly converges to an element
$y\in W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ (so as
$\|\cdot\|_{W^{1,0}(\Gamma_{T})}\leq\|\cdot\|_{2,\Gamma_T}$).
Element $y(x,t)$ is a weak solution (4), (5). This is established
by multiplying the first relation (10) to the absolutely
continuous on $[0,T]$ function $d_i(t)$ ($d_i(T)=0$) and next by
summing along $i=\overline{1,N}$ and integrating results along $t$
away from $0$ up to $T$. After integrating the first term by parts
to $t$ obtain identity
\begin{equation}\label{eq12}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
-\int\limits_{\Gamma_{T}}y^N(x,t)\frac{\partial Y(x,t)}{\partial
t}dxdt+\ell_T(y^N,Y)= \int\limits_{\Gamma}y^N(x,0)Y(x,0)dx\,+
\\
+\int\limits_{\Gamma_{T}}{f}(x,t)Y(x,t) dxdt \quad
(Y(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^Nd_i(t)u_i(x)).
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}

The set $\Sigma$ ($\Sigma$ is the set of all functions $Y(x,t)$
with arbitrary coefficients $d_i(t)$ possessing the above
property, and arbitrary natural $N$)  densely  into the subspace
of functions belonging to $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ and equal to zero
at $t=T$. This follows from the density of the set
$\{u_n(x)\}_{n\geq 1}$  in $W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ and properties
$Y(x,t)$ (continuity $Y(x,t)\in\Sigma$ along $t\in[0,T]$,
$Y(x,t)\in W^1_{\,0}(a,\Gamma)$ for each fixed $t\in[0,T]$  and
$Y(x,T)=0$) as follows. Fix in (12) function $Y(x,t)=Y^*(x,t)\in
\Sigma \left(Y^*(x,t)=\sum_{i=1}^{N^*}d^*_i(t)u_i(x)\right)$ and
on selected above subsequence $\left\{N_k\right\}_{k\geq1}$,
corresponding subsequence $\left\{y^{N_k}\right\}_{k\geq1}$, we
pass to the limit, starting with numbers  $N_k\geq N^*$. As a
result we obtain be a integral ratio (6) for the limit function
$y(x,t)$ when $\eta(x,t)=Y^*(x,t)$, and that means, by virtue of
the density of many $\Sigma$ in the subspace of functions
belonging to $W^{1}(a,\Gamma_T)$  and equal to zero when $t=T$,
$y(x,t)$ is a weak solution of initial-boundary value problem (4),
(5) of $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_T)$. Note that linearity of problem (4),
(5) and estimate (11) guarantee the uniqueness of weak solutions
$y(x,t)$. The statement of the theorem is proved.

Turn to the study of the resulting in proving theorems 1 weak
solutions $y(x,t)\in W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$: show that $y(x,t)$
belongs to space $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$.

\textbf{Theorem 2.} \emph{If the conditions of the theorem 1, then
initial-boundary value problem } (4), (5) \emph{weakly solvability
in  space  $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ for any $0<T<\infty$.}

{P~r~o~o~f.} For proof sufficiently to establish that every fixed
$t\in [0,T]$ track of  belonging to space $W^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$
weak problem solving (4), (5) is an element
$W_{\,0}^{1}(a,\Gamma)$ and continuously depends from $t$ in norm
$W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)$ (that is in norm $L_2(\Gamma)$). The tool of
analysis uses the generalized Fourier method with base
$\{u_i(x)\}_{i\geq 1}$, ortonormalization in $L_2(\Gamma)$ and
orthogonal in sense  of the scalar product $[\cdot,\cdot]$
(statement of the lemma 2). For simplicity of presentation,
several narrow down space  $L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, replacing it on
$CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)\subset L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$ (is the space of
functions of $L_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, continuous along $t$ in norm of
$L_{2}(\Gamma)$), when this $f(x,t)\in CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$ (the
latter is easy condition in applications). In other words the
functions $f(x,t)$, summable on the variable $t\in (0,T)$ in norm
of $L_{2}(\Gamma)$ are replaced functions $f(x,t)$, that are
continuous-variable $t\in [0,T]$  in norm of $L_{2}(\Gamma)$).

Consider a series
\begin{equation}\label{eq13}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(x,t) =\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\left(\varphi_i e^{-\lambda_it}+\int\limits_0^t
f_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)u_i(x)
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
 and decompositions
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \varphi(x)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty
\varphi_i u_i(x),\,\,\,\,~
\varphi_i=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\varphi(x)u_i(x)dx,
\\
f(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty f_i(t)u_i(x),\,\,\,\, ~
f_i(t)=\int\limits_{\Gamma}f(x,t)u_i(x)dx,\,\, t\in[0,T].
 \end{array} }}
\]

It is easy to verify that any from  a finite segments of series
(13)  is a weak solution of problem (4), (5) that satisfy (6),
boundary and initial conditions (5) (formally, ignoring the
convergence). Further study of the character of the convergence of
series (13) based on the properties of many eigenvalues and
systems of generalized eigenfunctions, submitted statements of
lemma 2, as well as on the analysis of norms
$\|u(\cdot,t)\|_{W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)}$,
$\|u_t(\cdot,t)\|_{W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)}$,
$\int\limits_0^t\|u_t(\cdot,t)\|^2_{W_{\,2}^{1}(\Gamma)}dt$,
$\|u(\cdot,t)\|_{[\cdot,\cdot]}$,
$\int\limits_0^t\|u(\cdot,t)\|^2_{[\cdot,\cdot]}dt$ of series (13)
[4] (see also [12, pp. 180, 185]). The latter represent a series
of uniformly convergent about $t\in[0,T]$. Where should that the
sum  $y(x,t)$ of the series (13) belongs to $V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_T)$
and  is a weak solution (4), (5) for any $T$. Checking integral
identity of  definition 2 is similar to how it was done in proving
the theorem 1: partially sum $y^N(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^N
\left(\varphi_i e^{-\lambda_it}+\int\limits_0^t
f_i(\tau)e^{-\lambda_i(t-\tau)}d\tau\right)u_i(x)$ of series (13)
is substituted in the integral identities (10) and conversions are
performed, resulting in (12). Following passage to the limit under
$N\rightarrow\infty$ conclude the reasoning.  This means that the
entire sequence $\left\{y^N\right\}_{N\geq1}$ is weakly converges
to an element (see proof of theorem~1).


\textbf{Remark  4.} When improvement the property of function
$f(x,t)$ along variable $t$ ($f(x,t)\in CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$) raise
the level of smoothness by $y(x,t)$ along $t>0$ (compare under
$t=0$ $y(x,0)\in L_2(\Gamma)$). This stipulate to
differentiability $y(x,t)$ under $t$  when $t>0$, as is
characteristically  for equations of parabolic type [4] (see also
[12, p. 184]).


\textbf{Theorem 3. }\emph{Initial-boundary value problem }(4), (5)
\emph{has only a weak solution in the space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ for any $0<T<\infty$.}\pagebreak

{P~r~o~o~f.} Proof of uniqueness by virtue of linearity problem
(4), (5) is the standard way:  assumes the existence of two
different solutions ${y}_1(x,t)$, ${y}_2(x,t)$ of class
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$   and shows (see (11) and the consequent
reasoning) correctness of inequality $\|{y}\|_{2,\Gamma_T}\leq0$
(${y}(x,t)={y}_1(x,t)-{y}_2(x,t)$)  for any $T>0$, and that means,
coincidence solutions ${y}_1(x,t)$, ${y}_2(x,t)$ in space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ (${y}_1(x,t)$ similarly ${y}_2(x,t)$
almost everywhere with a fixed $t\in[0,T]$ for any $T>0$).

\textbf{Corollary 1.} A weak solution of initial-boundary value
problem (4), (5) continuously depends on the source data $f(x,t)$
and $\varphi(x)$. Thus, shows the correctness of Hadamard
initial-boundary value problem (4), (5) in the space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{T})$ for any $0<T<\infty$.

\textbf{Remark 5. }Statements of theorems 1--3 are preserved under
substitution $[0, T]$ on $[t_0,T]$ ($t_0>0$), the initial
condition in the ratio (5) is replaced by
$y\mid_{t=t_0}=\varphi(x)$.

\textbf{Remark 6.} Boundary condition in (5) can be
non-homogeneity:
%
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y(x,t)\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma}=\phi(x,t).
 \end{array} }}
\]
Proof of theorems in this case literally repeat the above
reasonings. For this as a preliminary introduces a new unknown
function $\widetilde{y}(x,t)=y(x,t)-\Phi(x,t)$ (here $\Phi(x,t)$
is a arbitrary function of $L_2(\Gamma_T)$,  having generalized
derivative $\frac{\partial\Phi}{\partial x}\in L_2(\Gamma_T)$ and
satisfying (almost everywhere) non-homogeneity boundary condition
(5)). The integral identities in definitions 1 and 2 be changed
respectively.

In many applications where it is necessary to investigate the
properties of solutions ${y}(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_T)$ of
problem (4), (5) for an arbitrary finitely  $T$, it is important
to know the behavior ${y}(x,t)$  under  $t\rightarrow +\infty$,
i.~e. when  $t\in[0,\infty)$.

Let, as above   $f(x,t)\in CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, and
%
\begin{equation}\label{eq14}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
A
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
for any $t\geq 0$ ($A$ is fixed constant); the latter means that
the function $f(x,t)$ is defined in the domain $\Gamma\times[0,T)$
for any finite  $T$.

\textbf{Theorem 4.} \emph{Let ${y}(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_T)$ is
a weak solution of problem }(4), (5) \emph{for an arbitrary  $T>0$
which $f(x,t)$, satisfies the condition} (14). \emph{Then there is
such positive constant  $C$,  that}

\emph{a})
$\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
C$ \emph{for any} $t\geq 0$,

\emph{b}) $\|y(\cdot,t))\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq C$, \emph{when}
$t\rightarrow +\infty$.

{P~r~o~o~f.} In the conditions of theorems 2 and 3 the mapping
$t\rightarrow {y}(x,t)$ ($t\geq 0$)  is continuously. Split
half-line $[0,\infty)$ into sections $[j-1,j]$, $j=1,2,...$,\, and
relabel $t_{j}$ a number belonging to  $[j-1,j]$, for which
\begin{equation}\label{eq15}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma_T)}=\mathop{\max}\limits_{t\in[j-1,j]}\|y(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma_T)},
\quad j=1,2,...\,.
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}

For arbitrary positive  $s$ and  $t$ ($s<t$) from the integral
identities of the definition 1 of weak problem solving (4), (5)
should the ratio
%
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \int\limits_s^t(\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial
t},y(x,t))dt+\int\limits_s^t\int\limits_{\Gamma}\left(a(x)\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial x}\frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial
x}+b(x)y(x,t)y(x,t)\right)dxdt=
\\
=\int\limits_s^t(f(x,t),y(x,t))dt,
 \end{array} }}
\]
\newpage\noindent if you put  $\eta(x,t)=y(x,t)$ (ipso the
remark 4 of theorem 3 the function   $y(x,t)$ differentiable along
$t$, $\frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial t}\in L_2(\Gamma_T)$). Of
this ratio is obtained the inequality
\begin{equation}\label{eq16}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}-\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,s)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+
\alpha\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\\
\leq\left(\int\limits_s^t\|f(\cdot,t)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}dt\right)^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_s^t\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where  the  positive constant  $\alpha$ depends only on fixed
$a_*$ and $\beta$ (see the condition (2)).

Further reasoning relies on the idea presented in the monograph by
J.-L. Lions [13, p.~519]: use the inequality (16) for an arbitrary
segment  $[t_j, t_{j+2}]$, $j=1,2,...$, because when condition
(15) makes it possible the equality  $t_j=t_{j+1}$.

We show that for any $j=1,2,...$
\begin{equation}\label{eq17}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\max\{\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}, M\},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where
$M=\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{6A}{\alpha}\right)^{1/2}$,
$\chi$ is the inclusion constant the space $W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$ in
$L_2(\Gamma)$:
$\|\nu\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq\|\nu\|_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}$ for any
$\nu\in W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)$.

Let $\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}$, then the proof is complete.

Suppose that
\begin{equation}\label{eq18}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}>
\|y(\cdot,t_{j})\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

By virtue of (16) for  $s=t_j$, $t=t_{j+2}$ true the inequality
\begin{equation}\label{eq19}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\alpha\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\\
\leq
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_j)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
whence, comparing (19) to (18) it should be
\begin{equation}\label{eq20}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\alpha\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}<
\left(\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}
Taking into account $t_{j+2}-t_j\leq 3$ and the ratio (14),  we
obtain
$\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
3A$ and the evaluation (20) takes a resultant form
\begin{equation}\label{eq21}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma<
\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Since  $t_{j+2}-t_j\geq1$, then exist $\tau\in [t_j, t_{j+2}]$
such that
$\int\limits_{t_j}^{t_{j+2}}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma=
(t_{j+2}-t_j)\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}\geq\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}$,
it means, from the evaluation (21) it should be
\begin{equation}\label{eq22}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,\tau)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\chi\sqrt{\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}}.
\end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Let right how  $s=\tau$, $t=t_{j+2}$ in the ratio (16), then using
(21), come to the inequality
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,\tau)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}+
\left(3A\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\right)^{1/2},
\end{array} }}
\]
or, taking into account (22),
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\frac{1}{2}\|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq\frac{1}{2}\left(\chi\sqrt{\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}}\right)^2+
\left(3A\right)^{1/2}\left(\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\right)^{1/2}=\frac{3A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{3A}{\alpha}
\end{array} }}
\]
or
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|y(\cdot,t_{j+2})\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
M^2=\frac{6A}{\alpha^2}\chi^2+\frac{6A}{\alpha}.
\end{array} }}
\]


From here and the assumption (18) it should be (17) and further to
any $t>0$ ($j=1,2,...$) the inequality
$\|y(\cdot,t))\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\leq
\max\{\max\limits_{t\in[0,2]}\|y(\cdot,t)\|_{L_2(\Gamma)},
M\}=\theta$ is correctly.

Considering the inequality (16) in the interval [$t, t +1$] and
given the assessment to $\|y(\cdot t))\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}$, get
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\alpha\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
\frac{1}{2}\theta^2+A^{1/2}
\left(\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|y(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{W^1_{\,2}(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\right)^{1/2}<\vartheta
\end{array} }}
\]
(here $\vartheta=\frac{1}{2}\theta^2+\frac{\sqrt{3}A}{\alpha}$).

Thus, the assertion of the theorem is proved
($C=\max(\theta,\vartheta/\alpha)$),  the solution $y(x,t)$
defined in domain  $\Gamma_\infty=\Gamma_0\times[0,\infty)$.



\textbf{3. Stability of system (4).} Suppose $0\leq b(x)\leq\beta$
for $x\in\Gamma$ then the eigenvalues $\lambda_i$, $i\geq 1$, are
positive (remark 3). Consider the system (4) on the set
$\Gamma_{\infty}=\Gamma_0\times(0,\infty)$. Relabel
$\Gamma_{t_0,t}=\Gamma_{0}\times(t_0,t)$, $\partial
\Gamma_{t_0,t}=\partial \Gamma\times(t_0,t)$ ($0<t_0< t<\infty$),
$\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}=\Gamma_{0}\times(t_0,\infty)$, $\partial
\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}=\partial \Gamma\times(t_0,\infty)$; it is
clear that $\Gamma_{t_0,t}\subset \Gamma_{t}$. As above $f(x,t)\in
CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_T)$, moreover
$\int\limits_{t}^{t+1}\|f(\cdot,\varsigma)\|^2_{L_2(\Gamma)}d\varsigma\leq
A$ for any $t\geq 0$.

Let the state of system  (4) describes the function
$\overline{y}(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{t_0,\infty})$, what is a
weak solution of equation (4) in the domain  $\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}$
with initial and boundary conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq23}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y\mid_{t=t_0}=\overline{\varphi}(x),\quad
x\in\Gamma, \quad y\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}}=0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
and function  $y(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{t_0,\infty})$ is a weak
solution of equation (4) in the domain  $\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}$
with initial and boundary conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq24}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} y\mid_{t=t_0}=\varphi(x),\quad x\in\Gamma,
\quad y\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}}=0
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
(initial-boundary value problem (4), (23) differs from problem
(4), (24) the fact that the function $\overline{\varphi}(x)$ of
first ratio (23) replaced by a different function  $\varphi(x)$).
The state $\overline{y}(x,t)$ of system (4) call perturbed, and
${y}(x,t)$ is non-perturbed.  From the proof of the theo\-rem~3
(presentation (13) of weak problem solving (4), (5)) implies that
states  $\overline{y}(x,t)$, ${y}(x,t)$   are defined in the
domain  $\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}$, satisfy the corresponding initial
and boundary conditions (23), (24) and belong to the space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{t_0,\infty})$  for $f(x,t)\in
CL_{2,1}(\Gamma_\infty)$.

Below we offer the notion of stability solution to
initial-boundary value problem (4), (5) (stability of the
undisturbed system (4)) what analog for the Lyapunov stability.

\textbf{Definition 3.} The non-perturbed system (4) is stability,
if for any  $t_0>0$ and $\epsilon>0$  executed such
$\delta(t_0,\epsilon)>0$  that under
$\|\varphi-\overline{\varphi}\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}<\delta(t_0,\epsilon)$
is $\|y(\cdot,t)-\overline{y}(\cdot,t)\|_{W^1(a,\Gamma)}<\epsilon$
under $t\geq t_0$, where  $y(x,t)$  is  the perturbed status of
system (4).

\textbf{Remark 7.} Similarly, the definition of stability of the
non-perturbed system (4) you can enter the definition of uniformly
stability of the non-perturbed system (4) in the domain
$\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}$.


\textbf{Remark 8.} For the system (4) you can enter the definition
of asymptotic and exponential stability of the non-perturbed
system (4) in the domain $\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}$.

\textbf{Remark 9.} By virtue of the linearity of the system (4)
all definitions can be reformulated for zero solution (trivial
solution) of system (4).


\textbf{Theorem 5.} \emph{Let $0\leq b(x)\leq\beta$, $x\in\Gamma$,
then the non-perturbed system} (4)  \emph{in the domain
$\Gamma_{T}$ is  stability.}

{P~r~o~o~f.}  By virtue of the linearity of equation (4) function
$\theta(x,t)={y}(x,t)-\overline{y}(x,t)$  is element of space
$V^{1,0}(a,\Gamma_{t_0,\infty})$   and  a weak solution of
initial-boundary value problem  for homogeneous equation (4)
($f=0$), satisfies the initial and boundary conditions
\begin{equation}\label{eq11}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \theta\mid_{t=t_0}=\phi(x),\quad
x\in\Gamma, \quad \theta\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_{t_0,\infty}}=0,
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}
where $\phi(x)=\varphi(x)-\overline{\varphi}(x)$. Following the
reasoning of proof of theorems 1--3, the initial-boundary value
problem (4), (25) is uniquely weakly solvable, its solution has
form $\theta(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^\infty \phi_i
e^{-\lambda_it}u_i(x)$, $\phi_i=(\phi,u_i)$, and is limit weakly
converging sequence  $\left\{\theta^{N}\right\}_{N\geq1}$ of
approximations
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \theta^N(x,t)=\sum\limits_{i=1}^N \phi_i
e^{-\lambda_it}u_i(x),
 \end{array} }}
\]
moreover
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|\theta^N\|_{2,\Gamma_t} \leq
\sum\limits_{i=1}^N \phi^2_i e^{-2\lambda_it},\,\, ~
N=1,2,...\,\,.
 \end{array} }}
\]
Passage to the limit in the last inequality under
$N\rightarrow\infty$ and bearing in mind the re\-mark~3 we come to
the estimate ($e^{-2\lambda_it}<1$,~ $i=1,2,...$)
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \|\theta\|_{2,\Gamma_t} \leq
{C}^*\left(\|\phi\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\right)
 \end{array} }}
\]
for any $t\in[t_0,\infty)$; ${C}^*$  is constant, not dependent on
$t$. The latter means that (see (1))
\begin{equation}\label{eq26}
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
\left\|\theta(\cdot,t)\right\|_{W^1(a,\Gamma)} \leq
{C}^*\left(\|\phi\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}\right).
 \end{array} }}
\end{equation}

Fix  $\epsilon>0$, take  $\delta=\frac{\epsilon}{C^*}$, then from
(26) and
$$\|\phi\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}=\|\varphi-\overline{\varphi}\|_{L_2(\Gamma)}<\delta$$
it should be inequality
$\|\theta(\cdot,t)\|_{W^1(a,\Gamma)}=\|y(\cdot,t)-\overline{y}(\cdot,t)\|_{W^1(a,\Gamma)}<\epsilon$
for any $t>t_0$. Proof of completed.

\textbf{Example.} Let  $\Gamma$  is graph-star with ribs
$\gamma_k$, $k=1,2,3$, and internal  node $\xi$ (to simplification
the formulas assume that the ribs   $\gamma_k$, $k=1,2$,   are
parameterized of segment $[0,\pi/2]$,  $\gamma_3$  is
parameterized of segment $[\pi/2,\pi]$). In the domain
$\Gamma\times[0,\infty)$ we   consider the initial-boundary value
problem (4), (5) under  $a(x)=1$, $b(x)=0$ and  $f(x,t)=0$:
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 \frac{\partial y(x,t)}{\partial t}=\frac{\partial^2 y(x,t)}{\partial x^2},\;\;\;
 y\mid_{t=0}=\varphi(x),\;\;\;x\in\Gamma, \;\;\; y\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_T}=0.
 \end{array} }}
\]

A weak solution   $y(x,t)\in V^{1,0}(1,\Gamma_{\infty})$    of a
problem  is determined by the identity
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} \int\limits_{\Gamma}y(x,t)\eta(x,t)
dx-\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}y(x,t)\frac{\partial
\eta(x,t)}{\partial t}dxdt+\int\limits_{\Gamma_{t}}\frac{\partial
y(x,t)}{\partial t}\frac{\partial \eta(x,t)}{\partial t}dxdt=
\\
=\int\limits_{\Gamma}\varphi(x)\eta(x,0)dx
 \end{array} }}
\]
for any $t\geq 0$  and any function $\eta(x,t)\in
W^{1}(1,\Gamma_{T})$.  Easily to show [10, 11], that the spectral
problem (7) ($a(x)=1$, $b(x)=0$) in the weak formulation (8)
defines a set of eigenvalues $\{\lambda_n\}_{n\geq1}$
($\lambda_n=n^2$)  and system of generalized eigenfunctions
$\{u_n\}_{n\geq1}$, where eigenvalues when  $n=2k-1$  is  prime
numbers,  when $n=2k$   have multiplicity 2, the corresponding
generalized eigenfunctions are determined by the relations
($k=1,2,...$)
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} {u_{2k-1} (x) = \left\{
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 {\cos(2k-1)(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_1,} \hfill \\
 {\cos(2k-1)(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_2,}   \hfill \\
 {\cos(2k-1)(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_3,}  \hfill \\
\end{array} }} \right. }
 \end{array} }}
\]
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} {u_{2k,1} (x) = \left\{
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 {\sin2k(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_1,} \hfill \\
 {0,\;\;\;x \in\gamma_2,}  \hfill \\
 {\sin2k(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_3,} \hfill \\
\end{array} }} \right. }\quad
{u_{2k,2} (x) = \left\{ {{\begin{array}{*{20}c}
 {0,\;\;\;x \in\gamma_1,}  \hfill \\
 {\sin2k(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_2,} \hfill \\
 {\sin2k(x-\frac{\pi}{2}),\;\;\;x \in\gamma_3.} \hfill \\
\end{array} }} \right. }
 \end{array} }}
\]


As above in proving theorem 3 forming approximation of solution
$y^N(x,t)=\sum\limits_{n=1}^N \varphi_n e^{-n^2t}u_i(x)$ weakly
converging under  $N\rightarrow\infty$    to  element
$y(x,t)=\sum\limits_{n=1}^\infty \varphi_n e^{-n^2t}u_n(x)$,
$\varphi_n=(\varphi,u_n)$. Stability of the weak solution is
obvious.

The work examined the initial-boundary value problem with
Dirichlet boundary conditions in the ratios of (5).  All
estimates, reasoning and statements of theorem 1--5 persist for
boundary conditions
\[
{{\begin{array}{*{20}c} (a(x)\frac{\partial y}{\partial x}+\sigma
y)\mid_{x\in\partial\Gamma_T}=0,
 \end{array} }}
\]
where $\sigma$ is a positive constant.





\textbf{4. Conclusion.} The approach presented by the statements
of theorem 3--5 may be used to obtain conditions of stability
(asymptotic stability) of weak solution of initial-boundary value
problem (4), (5). The same approach applies to both tasks, space
variable $x$ which has a dimension of large 1 ($x\in
\mathbb{R}^n$, $n\geq2$) and for many-dimensional functions that
describe the state of researched system [14--16]. The results are
fundamental in tasks of optimal control and stabilization of
differential systems with time-delay [17--28].



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%\newpage
\input{04/ref-s-eng}% для английской статьи

%\newpage
\input{04/lit-ra-eng}% для английской статьи

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

{\footnotesize


%\thispagestyle{empty}

\vskip 3mm

\thispagestyle{empty} %очищаем стиль страницы
\thispagestyle{fancy} %включаем пользовательский стиль
\renewcommand{\headrulewidth}{0pt}%
\fancyhead[LO]{}%
\fancyhead[RE]{}%
\fancyfoot[LO]{\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}
\hfill}%
\fancyfoot[RE]{\hfill\footnotesize{\rm{Вестник~СПбГУ.~Прикладная~математика.~Информатика...~\issueyear.~Т.~15.~Вып.~\issuenum}}}%
% для оформления нижнего колонтитула
\cfoot{} %

}
